Technical Specifications 
For 
Auto Transfer Switch (ATS), 
Phase Sequence Corrector (PSC) 
& 
AC Distribution Board (ACDB) 
At 
National Load Despatch Centre (NLDC), 
 Katwaria Sarai, New Delhi

Contents 

Introduction………………………………………………………………………… 


Intent of the project………………………………………………………………… 

2.1 
Auto Transfer Switch………………………………………………………………. 

2.2 
Phase Sequence Corrector………………………………………………………….. 

2.3 
AC Distribution Board Requirements…………………………………………….... 

2.3.1 Output ACDB………………………………………………………………………. 

2.3.2 Enclosures/Panels…………………………………………………………………… 


Inspection and Testing…………………………………………………………….... 

3.1. 
Factory Test……………………………………………………………………….... 

3.2. 
Field Performance Test……………………………………………………………... 


Documentation……………………………………………………………………… 


Bid evaluation or Price……………………………………………………………… 

5.1. 
Work Schedule……………………………………………………………………… 

5.2. 
Defect Liability Period (Warranty)………………………………………………… 

5.3. 
Payment Terms…………………………………………………………………….. 

5.4. 
Penalty Clause……………………………………………………………………… 

5.5. 
Cancellation of Contract in Full or Part……………………………………………. 


General Requirements……………………………………………………………… 


Survey of site……………………………………………………………………….. 

Annexure - I………………………………………………………………………………… 

Annexure-II…………………………………………………………………………………. 

Annexure-III………………………………………………………………………………… 12 
Figure………………………………………………………………………………………..

1. Introduction 
The proposed AC Distribution Boards (ACDB) Panel, Automatic Transfer Switch (ATS) Panel, 
Phase Sequence Corrector (PSC) and other equipment envisaged under this contract shall be 
supplied, commissioned, maintained etc. at National Load Despatch Centre (NLDC), B-9, 
Qutab Institutional Area, Katwaria Sarai, New Delhi and shall be used to connect 2x 40 kVA 
UPS system and 250 A Raw Power from LT Panel to facilitate power supply for NLDC POSOCO 
premises. 
2. Intent of the project 
The intent of this Project is as follows:– 
 
• Testing, Supply, Installation of new proposed ACDB’s, ATS and PSC and associated 
equipment as per the specification and BoQ attached at Annexure-I and Annexure-II 
respectively. 
• Warranty of all the systems supplied under this contract for 01 year. 
• Extended warranty of the supplied system for further 01 year. 
2.1. Automatic Transfer Switch 
The Contractor shall provide two no’s of Automatic Transfer Switch (ATS) of 160 A and 250 A 
as per the technical specification specified under this contract. ATS Panel of 160 A and 250 A 
shall be fed through dual incoming supply from LT panel. ATS Panel should be wall mounted. 
ATS shall distribute power to the Phase Sequence Corrector equipment and provide 
protection against failures on feeder circuits. The scope for ATS includes supply, testing, 
installation, wiring, cabling, and commissioning of all associated hardware’s under this 
contract. The contractor shall supply and install MCCBs, connecting joints/cables and all 
associated items of adequate ratings for ATS Panel of 160 A and 250 A for providing input to 
the 150 A Phase Sequence Corrector (PSC) and 250 A Phase Sequence Corrector respectively 
(as per Annexure-I). ATS Panel should have manual change over provision so that in case of 
fault in ATS Panel, power supply may be manually bypassed and interruption may be avoided. 
The contractor shall extend safety earth connections from ATS panel to nearest earth grid 
/riser or earth pit using either suitably sized Copper cable or through 50 X 6 sq. mm GI strips. 
2.2. Phase Sequence Corrector 
The Contractor shall provide two no’s of Phase Sequence Corrector (PSC) Panel of 250 A and 
one Phase Sequence Corrector (PSC) Panel of 150 A as per the technical specification specified 
under this contract. PSC Panel of 150 A and 250 A shall be fed through incoming supply from 
ATS panel of 160 A and 250 A respectively. PSC Panel should be wall mounted. PSC Panel of 
150 A shall be connected with appropriate size of copper cable from 160 A ATS. PSC Panel of 
250 A shall be connected with appropriate size of copper cable from 250 A ATS. 250 A PSC 
Panel shall distribute power with appropriate size of flexible copper cable to the 250 A ACDB 
Output Panel. 150 A PSC Panel shall distribute power with appropriate size of copper cable to 
the terminal of 2x40 KVA UPS system. The scope for PSC includes supply, testing, installation,

wiring, cabling, and commissioning of all associated hardware’s under this contract. The 
contractor shall supply and install MCCBs/contactor, Surge protection devices etc. and all 
associated items of adequate ratings for providing input to the 2x40 KVA UPS and 250 A 
Output ACDB (as per Annexure-I). 
The contractor shall extend safety earth connections from PSC panel to nearest earth grid 
/riser or earth pit using either suitably sized Copper cable or through 50 X 6 sq. mm GI strips. 
 
2.3. AC Distribution Board Requirements 
The Contractor shall provide two no’s of AC power distribution boards (ACDBs) of 250 A and 
150 A as per the technical specification specified under this contract. The distribution boards 
shall distribute power to the Employer/ Owner equipment and provide protection against 
failures on feeder circuits. The scope for distribution boards includes supply, testing, 
installation, wiring, cabling, and commissioning of all associated hardware’s under this 
contract. The contractor shall supply and install MCCBs, MCBs, Surge protection devices etc. 
and all associated items of adequate ratings for ACDB (as per Annexure-I). 
A conceptual configuration showing the components and arrangements of ‘ATS’, ‘PSC’ and 
‘Output ACDB’ is shown in figure-1 and figure-2. The size and characteristics of each MCCB, 
MCB & Surge Protection Devices (SPDs), Automatic Transfer Switch (ATS) and Phase Sequence 
Corrector shall be determined and provided as specified under Annexure-I. The quantity of 
ATS, PSC, MCCBs, MCBs, Surge Protection Devices (SPDs), cables etc. shall be supplied as per 
Annexure-II. The MCCBs conforming to IEC-60947-2 and IS 13947-2/IEC 60947-2 shall be of 
four (04) Pole type of requisite rating. All the MCCBs shall provide over-current, short circuit 
protection and coordinate with associated breakers in upstream & downstream such that 
faults are cleared reliably with discrimination. 
The contractor shall extend safety earth connections from ATS, PSC & Output ACDB panel to 
nearest earth grid /riser or earth pit using either suitably sized copper cable or through 50 X 
6 sq. mm GI strips. 
 
2.3.1. Output ACDB 
The Contractor shall provide Output ACDB panel of 250 A rating and 150 A rating for further 
distribution of power to the different equipment. The rating shall be of minimum as stated in 
Annexure-I, Hardware Requirements. This distribution board shall be suitable for free-
standing or wall mounted type which shall be finalised after the site survey by the contractor 
after the award of contract. In this ACDB, total number of MCCBs and MCBs shall be provided 
as per the BoQ. 
One number of 4-pole Bus Coupler MCCB of requisite rating for each ACDB Panel shall be 
provided which shall be kept in normally closed (NC) condition when both UPS are running in 
parallel. This MCCB shall have suitable locking mechanism to avoid inadvertent opening while 
UPS are running in parallel.

250 A ACDB Output Panel shall be connected with 250 A ATS Panel with one 70 sq.mm. 4 Core 
Flexible cable and other 185 sq.mm. aluminium armoured cable. 70 sq.mm., 4 Core Flexible 
Copper cable shall be supplied and laid at the site as per BoQ. 
150 A ACDB Output Panel shall be connected with 160 A ATS Panel with suitable two 
25sq.mm. flexible copper cable. 25 sq.mm., 4 Core Flexible Copper cable shall be supplied and 
laid at the site as per BoQ. 
All the MCBs supplied under the project shall be of Curve C current characteristics to have 
faster fault clearing time and shall conform to IEC-60898 and IS 8828. 
Output feeders shall have indicating lamps for each phase & both section of bus charged 
indication. Two no’s of digital Voltmeter with selector switch for all phases on section of each 
bus shall be provided. 
2.3.2. Enclosures/Panels 
The equipment of ACDB shall be physically mounted either in a free standing or in a wall 
mounted enclosure/panel as finalized after the site survey by the contractor after the award 
of contract. Approval must be taken for the size of the ACDB, ATS and PSC panels after the 
site survey by the contractor after the award of contract. The MCCB and sub-assemblies shall 
be easily replaceable and maintainable. Cable entry shall be from the bottom/top of the 
enclosures (to be finalized after the site survey by the contractor after the award of contract). 
The Contractor shall state the type, size, and weight of all enclosures and indicate the 
proposed manner of installation. The applicable degree of protection of enclosures shall be 
at least IP54. Each ACDB and equipment within ACDB enclosures shall be clearly labelled to 
identify the enclosure/equipment. 
3. Inspection and Testing 
All equipment supplied under the project shall be factory tested before despatch to site as 
per requirement specified under this section. General inspection & testing requirements are 
as follows: 
3.1. Factory Test 
A factory test shall be conducted on all the offered equipment which shall include, but not be 
limited to the following, appropriate to the equipment being tested: 
a) Verification of all functional characteristics and requirements specified 
b) Inspection and verification of all construction, wiring, labelling, documentation and 
completeness of the hardware. 
Before the start of factory testing, the Contractor shall verify that all changes applicable to 
the equipment have been implemented. As a part of the factory tests, unstructured testing 
shall be performed to allow Employer/ Owner representatives to verify proper operation of 
the equipment under conditions not specifically tested in the above structured performance 
test. A minimum of 8 hours of the factory test period shall be reserved for unstructured 
testing. The Contractor's test representative shall be present and the Contractor's technical

staff members shall be available for consultation with Employer/ Owner personnel during 
unstructured test periods. All special test facilities used during the structured performance 
test shall be made available for Employer/ Owner’s use during unstructured testing. In 
addition to above, a list of factory tests specified at the end of the respective sections of this 
equipment shall also be performed. 
3.2. Field Performance Test 
After the equipment has been installed at site, the Contractor shall start up and check the 
performance of the equipment at field location. All hardware shall be aligned and adjusted, 
interfaces to all inputs and outputs installed, operation verified, and all test readings recorded 
in accordance with the Contractor's recommended procedures. The field performance test 
shall exhibit all functions of the equipment and duplicate factory test. All variances must be 
corrected prior to the start of the field performance test. 
Contractor shall submit the procedure for Factory and Site test and take approval from the 
Owner. 
 
4. Documentation 
Contractor shall visit the site before submission of any documents. After the discussion and 
visit of site only contractor shall submit the drawing of panels for approval from the owner. 
Drawing shall also indicate the arrangements of all the equipment envisaged under each 
panels. Data requirement sheets (DRS) for equipment and preferred make are enclosed at 
Annexure-I and Annexure-III respectively, however, it shall be finalised in consultation with 
owner before start of work. These will be duly filled and complied by the bidder & details 
thereof submitted along with the bid. 
5. Bid evaluation or Price 
a) List of equipment are mentioned in BoQ, however, if it has been felt that some additional 
items shall be required to meet the entire scope of work, same may be intimated while 
submitting bidding documents with price. After the award of LoA, if any additional items 
are required, Owner shall not pay any amount on that head. 
b) The Contractor shall quote for the Supply, Commissioning, Warranty, extended warranty 
and Taxes charges separately. 
5.1. Work Schedule 
Two (02) month from date of issuance of Letter of Award for supply, testing and 
commissioning of proposed system. 
5.2. Defect Liability Period (Warranty) 
The defect liability period is for 12 months, the period shall commence after issuance of TOC 
by the Engineer-in-charge or his/her authorized representative. During this period the vendor 
shall be responsible for any repairs or replacement of any defective part and shall rectify the 
installation free-of-cost to the owner.

Contractor shall provide separate price for extended warranty, initially it is envisaged for one 
year (after the completion of defect liability period) whereas is desired owner reserves the 
right to extend it for further 3 years at same price and terms & condition. 
5.3. Payment Terms 
a) For Supply, Testing and Commissioning: 90% payment shall be made after successful 
commissioning and testing of the system and after verification by Engineer-in-charge. 
b) For Warranty: 10% payment shall be released after lapse of defect liability period and 
after verification by Engineer-in-charge. 
c) Extended Warranty: Payment shall be released on six monthly basis and after the lapse 
of defined period. 
d) Tax shall be deducted at source as per the statutory laws. 
 
 
5.4. Penalty Clause 
System shall be supplied, tested and commissioned within two (02) month of acceptance of 
Letter of Award (LoA). Delay thereafter shall be considered to levy penalty as specified under 
the contract. 
5.5. Cancellation of Contract in Full or Part 
If vendor fails to deliver the services as per the scope of the work detailed in this LoA, due to 
any lapse from the vendor side, POSOCO reserves the right to cancel the order (including 
extended warranty period) within one month of notice. In the case of termination / 
cancellation of the order, the vendor shall not be entitled to recover from POSOCO any 
amount by way of damages, loss or otherwise. However, in case of cancellation of contract 
during extended warranty, pro-rata amount will be released. 
6. General Requirements 
The Contractor is encouraged to offer standard products and designs. However, the 
Contractor must conform to the requirements and provide any special or additional 
equipment/s or software necessary to meet the requirements stated in the specification. 
The employer reserves the right of execution of works within the stipulated quantity variation 
of 20% provision other than those indicated in the annexures at the same rates, terms and 
conditions. The Bidder's proposal shall address all functional and performance requirements 
within this specification and shall include sufficient information and supporting 
documentation in order to determine compliance with this specification without further 
necessity for enquiries. 
An analysis of the functional and performance requirements of this specification and/or site 
surveys, design, and engineering may lead the Contractor to conclude that additional items 
and services are required that are not specifically mentioned in this specification. The

Contractor shall be responsible for providing at no added cost to the Employer, such materials 
and services shall be considered to be within the scope of the contract. 
The bidders are advised to visit site (at their own expense), prior to the submission of 
proposal, and make surveys and assessments as deemed necessary for proposal submission. 
The successful bidder (Contractor) is required to visit sites. The site visits/routes shall include 
all necessary surveys to allow the contractor to perform the design and implementation 
functions. The Contractor shall inform their site survey schedule to the Employer/Owner well 
in advance. 
Successful bidder shall visit the site where this equipment shall be supplied, commissioned 
and maintained. 
 
 
7. Survey of site 
The contractor shall conduct a survey of the NLDC premises and identify the readiness of site 
with respect to access, installation, requirement of conduits and raceways, identification of 
routes for laying cables, finalizing the layout and placement of the ACDB, ATS and PSC 
verifying special requirements with respect to earthing and air-conditioning. After the survey 
of site size of panels (however, it is desired that all the components shall be considered as 
copper based in order to reduce the size of panels due to space constraints), cable entry etc 
shall be decided and accordingly drawing shall be submitted by the contractor.

Annexure - I 
Hardware Specifications 
a) ATS (Automatic Transfer Switch) 
 
S. 
No. Description 
Minimum Required Features 
Bidder 
Compliance 
1. Ampere 
Capacity 
250 A, 4P ATS & 160 A, 4P ATS 
 
2. Miscellaneous 
1. Phase Indicating Lights set R-Y-B-22.5 mm dia; 
LED Type. 
2. Phase Indicating Lights in Incoming and Output 
of ATS 
3. Indicating Lights for On/Off/Trip 
4. Manual Change Over Provision 
5. 6A SP Control MCB 10 KA C-Curve 
6. Voltameter-96x96 mm.sq., CL-1 Analog, 0-500V 
7. Voltameter Selector Switch 3P+Off; 6A 
 
 
b) Phase Sequence Corrector 
S. 
No. Description 
Minimum Required Features 
Bidder 
Compliance 
1. Ampere 
Capacity 
250 A & 150 A , 3P 
 
2. Applicable 
standards 
IEC 60947-2 
 
3. Miscellaneous 
1. Spreader Terminals, Auxiliary Contact, LED 
indicator for Power ON, Power Terminal 
Blocks (as per requirements) etc. 
2. Phase Indicating Lights set R-Y-B- 22.5 mm 
dia; LED Type 
 
 
c) MCCB: Bus Coupler and Outgoing Feeders 
 
S. 
No. Description 
Minimum Required Features 
Bidder 
Compliance 
1. Applicable 
standards 
IEC 60947-2 
 
2. Characteristics 
250 A, 4P, 25 kA with adjustable thermal O/L (80-
100 & fixed O/L & S/C release) + Door Interlocked 
 
3. Ampere 
Capacity 
250 A ,4P 
 
4. Miscellaneous 
Rotary Handle, Spreader Terminals, Auxiliary 
Contact, LED indicator for Power ON, Power 
Terminal Blocks (as per requirements) etc.

d) MCCB: Incoming Feeders 
 
 
S. No. Description 
Minimum Required Features 
Bidder 
Compliance 
1. 
Applicable 
standards 
IEC 60947-2 
 
2. 
Characteristics 
100 A,250 A, 4P, 25 kA with adjustable thermal 
O/L (80-100 & fixed O/L & S/C release) + Door 
Interlocked 
 
3. 
Indication 
Lamps: 
1. Phase Indicating Lights set R-Y-B-22.5 mm dia; 
LED Type: 230 V AC. 
2. Indicating Lights for On/Off/Trip: 220 V AC. 
3. 6A SP Control MCB 10 KA C-Curve 
 
4. 
Ampere 
Capacity 
250 A, 4P ; 100 A ,4P 
 
5. 
Voltmeter 
1. Voltameter-96x96 mm.sq., CL-1 Analog, 0-
500V 
2. Voltameter Selector Switch 3P+Off; 6A 
 
6. 
Miscellaneous 
Rotary Handle, Spreader Terminals, Auxiliary 
Contact, Surge Protection Device for class B&C, 
Power Terminal Blocks (as per requirements) etc. 
 
 
 
e) MCB: 
 
 
S. No. Description of 
the Features 
Minimum Required Features 
Bidder 
Compliance 
1. 
Applicable 
standards 
IEC 60947-2 
 
2. 
Characteristics 
32A-DP, 63A-4P, 4-pole, 10 kA, ‘C’ Curve 
 
3. 
Ampere 
Capacity 
32 A, 63 A 
 
4. 
Miscellaneous 
Power Terminal Blocks (as per requirements)

f) Main Bus Bars: 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Description of 
the Features 
Minimum Required Features 
Bidder 
Compliance 
1. 
Material Size: 
 
Copper: 
Phase-1x40x6 or Eq. Cross Section 
Neutral-1x40x6 or Eq. Cross Section 
 
2. 
Sleeve 
Heat shrinkable Black PVC sleeve with color 
coding ar regular interval for phase and neutral 
 
3. 
Earth Busbar 
1x25x3 Cu 
 
 
 
g) Copper Cable: 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Description of 
the Features 
Minimum Required Features 
Bidder 
Compliance 
1. 
Material Type 
and Size: 
 
Copper: 4 Core Flexible Cables upto 1.1kv grade 
as per IS:694 
Sizes :25 and 70 sq. mm 
 
2. 
Options 
- Stranded / annealed Copper 
Insulation-HFFR Insulated industrial cables 
1100V 
 
 
h) Panels (ATS, Phase Sequence Corrector, Input and Output)

Sl. 
No. 
Description of the Features 
Minimum Required Features 
Bidder 
Complia
nce 
1. 
Type of Product 
Indoor, Floor/Wall Mounting, Cubicle 
Fixed Type, Double Front 
 
2. 
Supply voltage 
415 +/- 10%, 3-phase 4-wire, 50 Hz +/- 5% 
3. 
The thickness of the 
structural frames and load 
bearing members 
For load bearing 2 mm and others 1.6 
mm 
 
4. 
Degree of Protection as per 
IS:13947 for enclosure only 
IP-54 
 
5. 
Fabrication: 
a. Enclosure frame 
b. Doors 
c. Front Side, partition 
d. Gland Plate 
e. Base Channel 
 
a. 2 mm CRCA sheet steel 
b. 1.6 mm CRCA sheet steel 
c. 1.6 mm CRCA sheet steel 
d. 3 mm sheet steel 
e. 2.5 mm CRCA Base Frame (ISMC-75 
Black) 
 
6. 
Cable Entry 
Bottom/Top 
 
7. 
Paint/Construction: 
a. Pre-treatment 
b. Paint Type 
c. Paint Shade (Exterior and 
Interior) 
d. Wiring 
e. Short Circuit Level 
 
a. 9 tank process 
b. Powder Coated 
c. RAL 7032 Smoke Grey, as per if 5 & 
coated with Peelable Compound finish. 
d. 1100 V grade PVC insulated wire of 1.5 
Sq.mm for control and 2.5 sq. mm for 
CT circuit. 
e. 20 kA/ 1 sec. 
 
8. 
Min. Clearance between (for 
Horizontal and Vertical bus 
bar) 
1. Phase to phase: 25 mm 
2. Phase to neutral: 25 mm 
3. Phase to Earth: 25 mm 
4. Neutral to Earth: 25 mm 
 
9. 
Incoming/Outgoing feeders 
As per SLD 
 
10. 
Applicable standards 
IS 8623 (Part-I) 1993 
 
11. 
Name plate 
It shall be non-rusting metal or 3 ply 
lamicoid with white engraved lettering on 
black back ground 
 
12. 
Others 
1. Partition between compartment & 
cable alley shall be non-metallic part. 
2. All metallic case like relays, instruments 
& other equipment shall be connected 
to earth with 2.5 sq.mm Cu Wire, Green 
Colour. 
3. SMC support shall be 450 mm between 
centre to centre.

Annexure-II 
Bill of Quantity (BoQ) 
List of items, quantities and services assessed for Project 
S. No. 
Description 
Quantity 
Supply (including 
1. 
Automatic Transfer Switch (ATS) Panel (160A) 
01 set 
2. 
Automatic Transfer Switch (ATS) Panel (250A) 
01 set 
3. 
Phase Sequence Corrector Panel (150 A) 
01 set 
4. 
Phase Sequence Corrector Panel (250 A) 
02 set 
5. 
Outgoing ACDB Panel 
(including 2 nos. incomer MCCB of 250 A and 1 
nos. bus coupler MCCB of 250 A, outgoing 12 nos. 
MCB of 63 A and 18 nos. MCB of 32 A) 
01 set 
6. 
Outgoing ACDB Panel 
(including 2 nos. incomer MCCB of 150 A and 1 
nos. bus coupler MCCB of 150 A, outgoing 8 nos. 
MCB of 63 A and 6 nos. MCB of 32 A) 
01 set 
7. 
25 Sq.mm , 4 Core , Flexible Copper Cable 
90 metre 
8. 
70 Sq.mm , 4 Core , Flexible Copper Cable 
140 metre 
Extended Warranty 
9. 
One (01) year Warranty Period 
 
Transportation 
10. 
Transportation of equipment 
 
Installation and commissioning 
11. 
Installation and commissioning (including internal 
wiring, etc.) 
 
Note: 
a) In above mentioned bill of quantity (BoQ), quantity mentioned with unit “Set” includes 
all the corresponding items mentioned under hardware specification (annexure-I). No 
additional cost on that head shall be reimbursed by owner. 
b) Costs of all internal wiring within the panel are also inclusive under above quoted price. 
No additional cost on that head shall be reimbursed by owner. 
c) Initially extended warranty envisaged is for one year, however, owner reserves the 
right to extend it for further 3 years at same price and terms & condition.

Annexure-III 
List of Preferred Make 
Sl. 
No. 
Description 
Preferred Make 
1. Automatic Transfer Switch (ATS) Schneider/Havells/Siemens/General Electric (GE) 
2. Phase Sequence Corrector 
Schneider/Havells/Siemens/Indokopp/C&S/MDS/C&S/G
E/L&T 
3. MCB 
Schneider/Havells/Indokopp/C&S/MDS/C&S/GE/L&T 
4. MCCB 
Schneider/C&S/GE/ L&T 
5. MCCB (for LT Panels) 
Schneider Electric 
6. Surge Protection Devices 
Schneider/Phoenix/JVM-Bradley/Batterman 
7. Indicating Lights LED 
Schneider/ C&S/Vaishno/Esbee/Teknic 
8. Voltameter 
AE/Rishabh 
9. Voltameter selector switch 
Switron/Salzer/Kaycee 
10. Rotary Handle 
Schneider 
11. Spreader Terminals 
FTC/L&T 
12. Auxiliary Contact 
Schneider 
13. Power Terminal Blocks 
Elmex/Connectwell/Phoenix 
14. Cables 
Reputed manufacturer

Figure 
 
 
Figure 1: - Raw Power Supply Arrangement

Figure 2: - UPS Power Supply Arrangement