White Paper
Load Bank Utilization in Data Centers

Load Bank Utilization in Data Centers
The data center industry is growing exponentially with construction of new facilities increasing every year. Power consumption is set to 
continue growing at an accelerated rate (see figure 1). Power reliability in data centers is crucial. A data center with 99% uptime per year will 
still have the equivalent of 88 hours of downtime. When you consider some larger data centers can lose thousands of dollars because of an 
outage, reliable power is vital. Load banks provide a means of testing and validating major electrical components in a modern data center to 
ensure efficient operation and reduce downtime.
USA Data Center Power Consumption 









Power Consumption (Billion kWh) 








Figure 1: USA data center 
power consumption. 
(source: www.quotecolo.
com/how-to-choose-
the-best-green-cloud-
hosting-provider/)
When are Load Banks used in Data Centers?
There are typically four main applications where load banks will be utilized in data centers. 
• Commissioning 
• Expansion
• Maintenance/ Periodic Testing 
• Component Replacements
Each application has varied requirements of power, size, type, and technical specification. Ensuring the correct load bank is used is vital in 
ensuring optimum testing.

Commissioning
Commissioning is the process of assuring all systems and components of an industrial facility are tested, installed, and operated to the 
requirements of the end user. Commissioning will help identify potential issues and ensure components and systems are working safely and 
efficiently. Load testing in the commissioning phase will ensure any faulty electrical components or systems fail and are replaced accordingly 
before going ‘live’. Real life load is not always available in the initial phases of construction as many data centers plan to expand as they go. 
Load banks are the only practical way of simulating real life load and will provide reassurance of the quality of components.
During the commissioning phase of a data center numerous critical components should be tested by load banks including back-up diesel 
generators, UPS systems, HVAC systems, bus tracks and tap offs, power distribution units, remote power panels, and server racks. A variety 
of types of load banks can and should be utilized to ensure testing is performed correctly.
Maintenance/Periodic Testing
The importance of back-up power supplies in data centers is critical. Numerous power and back-up power sources need to be rigorously maintained. 
Most data centers have a back-up UPS systems and diesel generators to supply power if the grid fails. Regular maintenance is vital in ensuring 
reduced down time in data centers, in the US an average cost of one minute of downtime is estimated at $7900 USD1. Load banks are the most 
effective way to test and stress electrical systems for maintenance and periodic testing purposes. A variety of load test types can be configured 
for specific maintenance purposes and reports will identify issues in systems that can be replaced or fixed to ensure efficient operation.
Expansion
Routinely, data centers are built larger than initially required 
with the aim to expand. As expansion occurs, correct simulation 
of power usage and cooling adaptation will be required. New 
components and hardware must prove operation and efficiency, 
especially in locations where sensitive or important information 
may be stored.
Load banks are the leading technology for simulating the real 
life power conditions of server racks. Most load banks will 
have the sophistication to provide detailed test reports. These 
reports can be used as proof of electrical compliance for clients 
who wish to purchase server space.
Component Replacements
Load testing is an effective process for testing and verifying 
all components in a circuit. Referring to the bathtub curve (see 
figure 2), failure starts to rise as components age and reach 

1 Data Center Dynamics (http://www.datacenterdynamics.com/content-tracks/power-cooling/one-minute-of-data-center-downtime-costs-us7900-
 on-average/83956.fullarticle) found the average downtime for one minute in data centers in on average US $7900. (4 December 2013)
Photo courtesy of ASCO Power Technologies
Reliability Engineering
Decreasing
Failure Rate
Increasing
Failure Rate
Constant
Failure Rate
Random Failures 
Observed Failure Rate 
Constant Failure Rate 
Early Failures 
Wear Out Failures 
Figure 2: The bathtub curve, reliability engineering.

Where Should Load Banks be Utilized?
Typical Load Banks
Back-up Diesel Generators
Resistive and Inductive Permanent Load Banks
Heating Ventilation Air Conditioning System
Resistive Portable Load Banks
Uninterruptible Power Systems
Resistive Permanent Load Banks
Server Racks
Server Rack Load Banks
HV Permanent Load Banks
Power Distribution Units
Resistive Portable Load Banks
Remote Power Panels
Resistive Portable Load Banks
Resistive Portable Load Banks
the end of their life cycle. The graph shows in early life there is an initial high failure rate, however this decreases as defective products are 
removed and installation errors are reduced. As the product gets older and wears out the failure rate begins to increase again, creating this 
bathtub curve. This directly correlates to data center electrical systems and components. Load banks can effectively test electrical systems, 
which reduces potential future downtime.
Where are load banks used in data centers?
Back-up Diesel Generators
The majority of data centers have a diesel generator located on site to supply power in the event of an outage. Loss of power in data centers can cost 
people and businesses millions of dollars via lost sales, loss in customer confidence, and steep financial penalties for missing service level agreement 
contracts. Correct operation and maintenance of the diesel generator is vital in ensuring maximum uptime of a data center.
Load bank testing is the preferred method of ensuring efficient operation of a gen-set. A load bank will simulate electrical load and allow the 
operator to find potential issues and faults on the gen-set so in the event of a power outage it will work as required. A load test will ensure 
correct operation of the voltage regulator, governor, cooling system, fuel system, control system and also prevents the dangers of wet stacking 
that are typical on lightly loaded generators.
Either a purely resistive or a resistive inductive load bank can be used to test the diesel gen-sets. A purely resistive load bank will confirm an 
engine’s ability to provide kW and deliver an equivalent amount of kVA. A resistive inductive load bank will fully test the power supply as it will 
provide impedance supply currents out of phase with voltage. 
Diesel generators should be load tested frequently. Typically, in larger data centers permanently installed containerized resistive inductive 
load banks are used to meet the higher capacity and endure tough outdoor conditions. Many load bank suppliers have control systems to 
Photo courtesy of ASCO Power Technologies
Wet Stacking occurs from operation under no-load or light-load conditions. Operation in an unloaded condition (such as extended idle 
time) or continual use at less than the recommended minimum load level causes fuel deposits to collect on the combustion chamber, 
injector nozzles, piston rings, turbocharger, and exhaust system. The result is diminished engine output capacity.

perform automatic and transient load tests. The load test results can be saved and filed to build a picture of the health of a generator over 
time. Alternatively, load bank control can be integrated into existing control systems typical in larger data centers.
Heating Ventilation Air Conditioning (HVAC) Systems
Overheating of server racks is an issue that could have catastrophic consequences. Load banks are now an integral part of heating, ventilation 
and air-conditioning (HVAC) commissioning. Load banks produce heat as a by-product of dissipating electrical power. The heat produced 
simulates that of a server rack and the more electrical power dissipated the more heat produced. The reaction to the heat produced can be 
monitored to test the effectiveness of the HVAC under load. Smaller load banks can be manoeuvred to specific parts of the data centers to 
test aspects of the HVAC system.
Load bank networking has revolutionized HVAC testing in data centers. Load banks can be connected in a network and strategically placed 
throughout a data center hall to simulate the actual server locations. All the load banks within the network can be controlled by a single hand-
held control to save operator time and ensure consistent load on all load banks. Furthermore, within a network the operator can configure 
individual load on single load banks to create hot spots.
Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) Systems
UPS systems are now standard in most data centers. In its simplest form, a UPS is a number of battery packs within an enclosure that 
automatically start if mains power fails. UPS systems bridge the gap between grid failure and the back-up power source starting. The UPS may 
only need to run for a few seconds or minutes, however seamless power source transition is vital.
Load banks validate correct operation and performance of a UPS system. The load banks discharge the batteries to keep in a healthy condition 
and determine autonomy. The invertors and distribution can by monitored as load is applied to ensure correct operation.
Typically, UPS systems will be tested as part of a scheduled maintenance program with other back-up power supplies such as diesel generators. 
Permanently installed resistive load banks are typically used in UPS testing.
Server Racks
Lower capacity load banks can be purpose built to fit into standard server racks. The rack mounted load banks simulate heat and power 
consumption that servers would create. This is a much more cost effective method of finding potential errors in power and operation then 
Typical data center layout.
Common load bank usage 
for data center testing.
Server
Racks
Power 
Distribution 
Units
Generators
Remote 
Power 
Panels
Uninterruptible
Power Supply

Summary
The global power consumption of data centers is increasing year after year and the importance of reliability is mission critical. The resulting 
uptime is directly derived from correct commissioning and maintenance provided by load banks. Reducing downtime due to electrical system 
and component issues ensures there is no loss of data, loss of sales, or financial penalties.
risking using expensive servers to find potential faults. Once the server racks has been validated the real life server can be installed with the 
knowledge that the power will be reliable and it will not overheat. 
As part of the data center commissioning process, room design, equipment placement, and the effectiveness of the room’s cooling system all have 
to be tested and verified. The challenge is that room validation tests must be completed prior to the installation of servers and other equipment. 
Whole room temperature testing is notoriously inaccurate at recreating production conditions, increasing the likelihood of the need to reconfigure 
and re-test the cooling system and aisle layout after production servers are in operation. This can add significant costs to data center budgets and 
requires downtime of production systems to correct. Server rack mounted load banks are designed to reduce this risk.
With its ability to vary electrical load, discharge heat and airflow, the rack-mounted load banks precisely simulate the operational conditions of 
production servers, and validate the hot/cold isle cooling design before the first server is installed. By validating the cooling system’s ability to 
sustain the designed temperature delta of the production server configuration, data center managers can minimize the risk of having to re-work 
the cooling system or isle configuration of a data center at a later date, which has many inherent pitfalls including downtime, cost, and disruption.
Load banks can test the gross capacity of substations and verify relays and metering. A load bank can also be used in conjunction with a 
transformer to test medium and high voltages. The power output by the substation must be reliable and able to meet data center power 
demands and a load bank is the best method to achieve this.
Power Distribution Units (PDU) 
A power distribution unit is a device for controlling electrical power in a data center. Many are rack mountable and control/monitor the power 
to servers, switches, and other devices. Resistive load banks are often used in the commissioning phase of a data center to test the PDU’s and 
ensure correct operation. The typical size of PDU is between 100-300kVA, therefore portable castor mounted load banks are often used for 
testing. The portable load banks can be positioned at each PDU in the data center hall, power can be applied and the PDU operation can be 
monitored. Load testing PDU’s is a cost effective method of ensuring that multiple racks will be receiving the required power for operation.
Remote Power Panels (RPP) 
Remote power panels are used in conjunction with PDU’s. The RPP is a separate enclosure that allows a sub-feed from a PDU to connect a 
distribution panel distributing power to rack systems. The RPP allows the PDU to be located in a separate computer room and allows PDU’s 
larger than 300kVA with large sub feed breakers to be utilized. Load banks are regularly used when commissioning RPP’s to ensure efficient 
operation and distribution of power from the PDU to the rack systems.
Bus track power distribution is becoming more common in data centers allowing greater flexibility and accommodation of rising power 
densities. Load banks will test the bus tracks power units, feed tracks, and tap offs to ensure efficient operation.
Renting vs Purchasing Load Banks
During the commissioning phase, load banks are utilized for testing numerous electrical components (as discussed earlier in this document). 
The renting or purchasing of load banks will depend on the location, size, security, and maintenance schedule of the data center. Analysis of 
these variables will allow the site manager to make an informed decision.

The ASCO and ASCO Power Technologies marks are owned by Emerson Electric Co. or its affiliates and utilized herein under license. ©2017 ASCO Power Technologies. All Rights Reserved.
loadbanks.ascopower.com
customercare@ascopower.com
ASCO. Innovative Solutions.
ASCO Power Technologies | Avtron
6255 Halle Drive
Cleveland, OH 44125
Tel: 216.573.7600
LBsales@vertivco.com
ASCO Power Technologies | NJ Froment & Co. Ltd
Easton-on-the-Hill
Stamford, PE9 3NP
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 1780 480033
froment.sales@vertivco.com