White Paper
Revision: September 2021
Load Bank 
Use in Data Centers

Load Bank Use in Data Centers
Load banks offer practical approaches for testing and maintaining power and cooling systems in data center facilities. 
This following narrative surveys their use across data center systems and explains their application in IT environments.
Background Information
Data centers play a vital role in supporting modern economic activity, enabling technologies used at industrial and 
manufacturing facilities as well as in transport, logistics, banking, education, entertainment, and more. Since the onset of 
the COVID-19 pandemic, digitization has increased due to changes in business-to-business and business-to-consumer 
commerce, and in work-at-home trends. Consequently, the importance of data centers has never been greater. Their 
ability to deliver vital services relies on the continuous availability of electrical power.
While the impacts of downtime vary with the type of data center and scale of any outage, downtime costs can commonly 
amount to hundreds of thousands of dollars per hour. In addition, downtime prevents users from completing vital 
tasks, which then impacts the reputations of service providers and can incur penalties for not meeting service level 
agreements. Because power availability is an important part of providing reliable services, verifying power and cooling 
system capabilities plays an vital role in ensuring service continuity. Load banks provide a means of testing and verifying 
the performance of data center power and cooling systems to ensure efficient operation and minimize downtime.
Load Bank Use in Data Centers
There are four primary applications where load banks are utilized in data centers:
1. Commissioning
2. Expansion
3. Maintenance and Periodic Testing
4. Equipment Replacement
Load bank requirements for each application vary power, size, type, and technical specification. Ensuring the correct 
load bank is used is vital to ensuring optimal testing.

Figure 1: Equipment Life Cycle
Initial
Wear-Out 
Constant-Rate
Time
Failures
Commissioning
In the course of equipment life-cycles, failure rates can be expected to vary according to the relative age of the 
equipment. Referring to Figure 1, initial failure rates are high early in the life-cycle. The failure rate decreases as defective 
products are removed and installation errors are corrected, and the equipment operates with relatively low rates of 
failure thereafter. As products reach the end of their service life, failure rates begin to increase again.
Commissioning is the process of ensuring that data system systems and equipment are thoroughly tested when they are 
installed, and that they operate to the requirements of the end user. Commissioning helps identify potential issues and 
ensure components and systems work properly and efficiently. During data center commissioning, critical systems are 
tested, including backup diesel generators; uninterruptible power supplies (UPS); heating, ventilation, and cooling (HVAC) 
systems; electrical bus and distribution cabling; power distribution units; and remote power panels. Load testing during 
commissioning ensures that faulty components or systems are identified and repaired or replaced before the facility is 
turned over to the end-user. Because full facility load is not always available during construction and commissioning, load 
banks are used to supplement loads to simulate design conditions and verify proper function. For information about 
testing battery and UPS systems, review Direct Current Load Banks for Battery Capacity Testing.
Load banks are also used to commission data center cooling systems. By placing resistive load banks where heat loads 
will ultimately be present, cooling systems can be tested to verify their capacity, and to adjust the balance of air flow 
distribution to optimize cooling performance. Testing cooling performance throughout an entire server room can require 
locating a quantity of load banks throughout the space. This type of testing is streamlined by networking the load banks to 
provide common control and data collection functions. Networked load bank controls enable convenient operation and 
adjustment of load banks during tests. Automated data collection streamlines the evaluation and reporting of load test 
results. For information about testing data center cooling systems, review the Avtron white paper entitled Applying Loads in 
Limited Access Facilities and Distributed Environments - Applications for Suitcase-Style Load Banks.
Expansion
Data centers are often sized to accommodate future expansion. When expansion occurs, new systems and components 
must be tested under load to prove their operability and efficiency. Correct simulation of the newest power and heat 
loads is necessary. Load banks are used to execute the required testing. For example, a data center may add a number 
of server racks to an existing facility. Co-location customers may require evidence of the performance of the power 
and cooling systems serving these locations. Multiple load banks can be used to simulate the electrical load that will be 
placed on the power distribution systems by the new equipment. Resistive load banks can be placed at key locations 
to verify local cooling system performance. The resulting data can be automatically compiled into reports that verify 
compliance to customers purchasing server space.

Maintenance and Periodic Testing
Most data centers utilize both backup UPS systems to support computing during relatively short power interruptions 
and diesel generators to supply power for longer outages. Regular maintenance and testing of these systems are vital 
to ensuring their availability. Load banks effectively test and stress electrical systems for maintenance and periodic 
testing purposes. In these applications, a variety of load test types can be configured for specific maintenance purposes. 
The resulting reports identify issues that can then be resolved. For additional information, review the Avtron resources 
referenced in the Commissioning section of this document.
Equipment Replacement
When specific components or equipment are replaced or repaired, their proper function should be verified. Load testing is 
effective for verifying the proper function and performance of repaired or replaced equipment prior to return to service.
Types of Load Banks for Data Center Systems
Load bank elements apply resistive, inductive, or capacitive loads to circuits, or a combination thereof. When testing data 
center systems, load banks should be selected the provide the type of load that best matches the characteristics of the 
load equipment. For instance, circuits serving primarily motor loads should be tested using an inductive load bank. For 
more information about the types of loads that can be applied, review the Avtron article entitled Resistive, Inductive, and 
Capacitive Load Banks and the Avtron white paper entitled Resistive, Inductive and Capacitive Load Elements.
Figure 2 illustrates the configuration of backup power system in a data center facility. For an interactive 3D Model of 
backup power equipment in a data center, review the Avtron Power Solutions Interactive 3D Facilities. 
Figure 2: Backup Power System Configuration

Application
Type
Backup Generators
Resistive and Inductive Load Banks
Uninterruptible Power Systems
Resistive Permanent Load Banks
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning Systems
Resistive Portable Load Banks
Substation
High Voltage Load Banks
Power Distribution Units
Resistive Portable Load Banks
Remote Power Panels
Bus Work
The table lists types of load bank typically used for select applications.
Backup Diesel Generators
The majority of data centers use one or more onsite diesel generators to supply power during utility outages. Correct 
operation and maintenance of the diesel generator is vital in ensuring maximum uptime of a data center.
Load bank testing verifies generator availability and performance. A load bank will simulate electrical load and allow 
testers to identify potential problems. This enables correction of conditions that are found so that backup power will 
be available when required. A load test can verify the correct operation of an engine-generator’s voltage regulator, 
governor, cooling system, fuel system, and control system.
Applying load also avoids diesel “wet stacking” that occurs when gensets are operated with insufficient load. Doing so 
can cause unburned fuel residues to accumulate in or on engine combustion chambers, injector nozzles, piston rings, 
turbochargers, and exhaust systems. The result is diminished engine output and potential impacts to reliability. For 
additional information, review the Avtron article entitled Manage Load To Avoid Diesel Wet Stacking.
Either a purely resistive or a resistive-inductive load bank can be used to test diesel gensets. A purely resistive load bank 
will evaluate an engine’s ability to provide the rated kW and deliver an equivalent amount of kVA. A resistive-inductive 
load bank will fully test the power supply by applying impedance currents out-of-phase with voltage.
Diesel generators should be load tested periodically in accordance with regulatory and industry codes as well as 
customer requirements. In larger data centers where loads are greatest, permanently installed, containerized, resistive 
inductive load banks are often used to provide sufficient load and endure outdoor environmental conditions.
Many load bank suppliers offer control systems that perform automatic and transient load tests. The load test results 
can be archived and reviewed assess generator performance over time. Alternatively, load bank control can be 
integrated into existing control systems often found in larger data centers.
HVAC Systems
Insufficient cooling can impact the reliability of servers and other IT equipment. Load banks are an important part of HVAC 
commissioning activities. Because load banks dissipate electrical power as heat, they are used to simulate the heat output 
of IT equipment. An HVAC system’s reaction to this heat can be monitored to test the effectiveness of the cooling system. 
In the course of this work, load banks can be moved to specific locations to test local HVAC performance. Networking 
these load banks enables someone to operate all units from a single handheld control to save operator time and ensure 
consistent load. An operator can adjust the operation of individual load banks to create hot spots as needed.

UPS Systems
In its simplest form, a UPS is an enclosed assembly of battery packs that automatically supplies power to loads if mains 
power fails. UPS systems are especially useful for providing power from the onset of a mains outage until acceptable 
power is supplied by the facilities backup power generation system. A UPS may only need to run for a few seconds or 
minutes; however, bumpless power source transition can be vital to the operation of downstream IT loads.
Load testing validates the correct operation and performance of a UPS system. One or more load banks are used to 
discharge the batteries in accordance with manufacturer specifications and evaluate their ability to supply the necessary 
amount of power. In addition, the electrical performance of UPS invertors and distribution equipment can be evaluated 
to ensure correct operation.
Typically, UPS systems will be tested as part of a scheduled maintenance program with other back-up power supplies 
such as diesel generators. Resistive load banks are typically used for UPS testing.
Substation
The power provided to a data center by a substation must be both reliable and adequate to meet IT power demands.
Load banks are routinely used to test the capacity of substations to provide rated power and verify the performance of 
relays and meters. A load bank can also be used with a transformer to test medium and high voltage feeds.
Power Distribution Units
Power Distribution Units (PDUs) may be rack-mounted and are used control and monitor power to servers, switches, 
and other devices. Resistive load banks are often used during commissioning to test PDUs and verify correct operation. 
Because a PDU can often be sized at 100 to 300kVA, portable castor-mounted load banks are typically used for testing 
them. Portable load banks can be positioned at each PDU in the data center hall, then power can be applied and PDU 
operation can be monitored. Load testing PDU’s is a cost-effective method of ensuring that multiple racks will receive 
the power for required by downstream equipment.
Remote Power Panels
Remote Power Panels (RPPs) are used in conjunction with PDUs. The RPP is a separate enclosure that allows a sub-feed 
from a PDU to connect a distribution panel that feeds load equipment. The RPP enables PDUs to be placed in a separate 
room, and also allows larger PDUs with sub-feed breakers to be used. Load banks are regularly used to commission 
RPPs to ensure proper operation and distribution of power from the PDU to the rack systems.
Bus Tracks
Bus track power distribution is becoming more common in data centers, allowing greater flexibility and accommodation 
of rising power densities. Load banks test bus track power units, feed tracks, and tap offs to ensure efficient operation.

Summary
Data Centers provide vital services that rely on the continuous availability of electrical power. Because power availability 
is essential to providing reliable services, verifying power and cooling system capabilities plays an important role in 
ensuring service continuity. Consequently, load banks are used to commission, expand, maintain, and test power and 
HVAC systems and equipment, including replacement equipment. These systems include backup generators, HVAC and 
UPS systems, substations, power distribution units, remote power panels, and electrical bus work.
In order to test electrical systems and equipment, load banks must be selected to apply the appropriate types of loads 
to power sources. A range of options is summarized in the table herein. Testing can be streamlined by using load bank 
control systems to record data and compile test reports. Networking multiple load banks together enables control of 
many units from a single electronic controller for further productivity gains.

© 2023 Avtron Power Solutions. All Rights Reserved. 
w w w . a v t r o n p o w e r . c o m
Avtron Power Solutions 
6255 Halle Drive
Cleveland, OH 44125, USA
Tel: 216 573 7600
 
Cliffe Road, Easton-on-the-Hill
Stamford PE9 3NP, United Kingdom
Tel: +44 (0) 1780 480033
customercare@avtronpower.com