RFI 10650-19 
 
Questions and Answers 
 
Criminal Case Management System (Prosecution) 
 
 
The purpose of this document is to provide questions and answers regarding this RFP. The following Q&As 
are current as of 6/28/2019: 
 
Q1. While working through the RFI, pricing was requested. I didn't see the number of users for the City 
Attorney's Office. Pricing is based on the number of FTE in the office. Can you tell me what that 
number is? 
A1. The prosecution staff at the City of Redmond consists of five (5) people. However, that does not 
include anyone from our Technology Info Services (TIS) department who would also need access to 
help maintain the system going forward. 
 
Q2. What the is the estimated cost? 
 
A2. That number is to be provided by the vendor. 
 
Q3. Has the Department allocated funding yet? If so, through which source (budget, CIP, state/federal 
grant etc.)? 
A3. The purpose of the RFI is to establish budgetary numbers. And the source of funding is not defined. 
 
Q4. Would it be possible to name the three greatest challenges the Department is having with the 
current solution? 
A4. There is no current “solution.” The prosecutor’s office does not have an electronic case 
management system. 
 
Q5. Can the Department elaborate on any additional drivers behind this acquisition that may not be 
addressed in the RFI? 
A5. There are no additional drivers besides those already stated. 
 
Q6. Which operating platform does the Department currently use? / Is desired? 
A6. The operating platform is to be provided by vendor. 
 
Q7. Does the Department anticipate any professional or consulting services may be needed to 
accomplish this effort? (i.e. project planning/oversight, PM, QA, IV&V, staff augmentation, 
implementation services etc.)? 
A7. No, this will be kept in house and vendor specific. 
 
Q8. May companies from outside the USA (e.g. India or Canada) submit responses? 
A8. Any company is free to submit responses to this RFI, although the City is likely to favor more 
local/domestic vendors.

Q9. Can we submit the proposals via email? 
 
A9. The City considers a complete response to include a printed copy and emailed copy. 
 
Q10. How many users are outside the City that need access to system information, if applicable? 
 
A10. Zero. 
 
Q11. How many IT staff will need administrative access to the system? 
 
A11. This is dependent on the solution vendor’s recommendation and the solution itself. 
 
Q12. Does the City own and use Dynamics365 (CRM) today? 
A12. The City is moving from DynamicsAX to D365 for Finance and Operations. The City does not use 
D365 CRM. 
 
Q13. Does the County want the system to be hosted on premise at the City or hosted in the “Cloud” by 
the Vendor? 
 
A13. The County is not involved in this decision. 
 
Q14. Does the City prefer a phased implementation or a single cut over approach? 
A14. Whichever approach the vendor can support with training. We want our system running as soon 
as possible once approved. 
 
Q15. How many users would need training? 
 
A15. See answer to #1 
 
Q16. Does the City have trainers, or do you require the Vendor to administer all end user training? 
 
A16. Vendor. 
 
Q17. How many identified integrations/interfaces need to be included in the project? 
 
A17. Not known at this time. 
 
Q18. Can we submit the proposals via email? Is there data from an existing system or systems that 
need to be migrated to the new system? Please provide the following information for both the 
interfaces and data migration databases if applicable: The database type, Number of tables to be 
integrated, Volume of data to be integrated, Frequency of the integration, File or format 
 
A18. Hard copy files. 
 
Q19. How many users are expected for the application? Can you provide a breakdown of roles within 
this user base? (i.e. attorney, clerical staff, victim advocates, etc.) 
 
A19. 3 attorneys, 2 staff, IT representative 
 
Q20. Can you provide the number of systems that you expect to be integrated with the case 
management application on top of the Spillman & Laserfiche systems? 
 
A20. 0-1

Q21. Do you have any ancillary “stand-alone” databases that will require a migration of information 
into the new case management system? 
 
A21. No 
 
Q22. Do you have a preferred deployment option? Cloud vs On-Premise? 
A22. The City is open to both options. 
 
Q23. Do you have internal trainers to be taught to support a “train-the-trainer” methodology, or would 
you like to have the Vendor provide end user training for all users? 
 
A23. Vendor 
 
Q24. What is the budget for this project? 
 
A24. Budget still being determined based on RFI’s. 
 
Q25. Will all questions and answers from all vendors be shared? 
 
A25. No. 
 
Q26. Does the scope of the project include integration with Laserfiche? If so, will Laserfiche be used 
for both document management and records retention? 
A26. The police department intends to transition to Laserfiche for records management and document 
management. Our hope is that our new case management system can integrate with Spillman 
(supported by Laserfiche) in order to pull documents/discovery from it as needed for our case files. 
 
Q27. Item 11 on page 2 of the RFI document states “Includes redaction functionality with limited 
automated redactions”. Will you provide an example of limited automated redactions? 
A27. We interpret limited automated redactions as having the ability to set features as to what will be 
redacted in reports and the ability to edit or change default preferences. Some cases require we redact 
all victim information while some requires we leave witness information available. We need information 
on what automations the case management system allows for redactions in criminal discovery. 
 
Q28. Item 13 on page 2 states “Executes paperless disclosure of case evidence including audio and 
video files to defense attorneys.” What is an example of a typical workflow to execute paperless 
disclosure? 
A28. We do not currently have a workflow for paperless disclosure. Most discovery is photo-copied, 
printed and provided to defense in court. We do occasionally scan and email discovery when 
requested, otherwise it is copied and mailed out. We anticipate a typical workflow to executive 
paperless disclosure with a case management system would stem from pulling the discovery generated 
by police from Spillman (supported by Laserfiche) into the case management system, and then sending 
from the case management system to defense, once appropriately compiled and redacted. 
 
Q29. Will the software be installed on premise or in a cloud environment? 
 
A29. Likely installed on-premise as a virtual server in VMware ESXi 6.7u1. 
 
Q30. Will preference be given to browser-based applications? 
 
A30. From a TIS perspective, not necessarily.

Q31. Are solutions that utilize VDI technology (Citrix, RDP, VMware View) acceptable? 
A31. Acceptable perhaps, but not ideal. At this time, we don’t currently have a fully-functioning VDI 
infrastructure and standard in place to plug into, so a VDI solution would initially be higher-overhead, 
from a TIS perspective. 
 
Q32. Will any users be accessing the system via VPN? If yes, please provide technical requirements. 
A32. We currently utilize Microsoft Direct Access and / or Cisco AnyConnect. Microsoft Direct Access is 
only capable of reaching internal resources that utilize IPv6, but Cisco AnyConnect works with IPv4. 
 
Q33. If planning on migrating data to the new system what sample data, record layouts, schema, etc. is 
available for analysis? 
 
A33. Not known at this time. 
 
Q34. What is the desired timeframe for implementation? 
 
A34. Once approved and purchased, 3-6 months 
 
Q35. Will any consultant be assisting with product selection or implementation? If a consultant is 
involved, please identify them. If assisting with the implementation, what systems have they had 
experience with in the past? 
A35. We do not have consultants working on the implementation. We will require assistance from the 
vendor to train and implement. We will be working with our internal TIS group, contact Jonny Chambers 
on technical and functional requirements. 
 
Q36. Does the scope of the project include integration with an accounting system? If so, provide 
functional and technical requirements? 
 
A36. No. 
 
Q37. Does the scope of the project include integration with Microsoft Exchange/Outlook? If so, what 
version of Exchange/Outlook? 
A37. Yes – we currently utilize a hybrid Exchange deployment. All user mailboxes live in Exchange 
Online. We also have an on-premise Exchange 2013 hybrid server to sync AD account email properties 
between on-prem active directory and Exchange Online, and to also facilitate SMTP relay for on-
premise mail-enabled applications. Outlook client is Outlook 2016 32-bit version 16.x.xxxxx.xxxxx. 
 
Q38. Does the scope of the project include integration with Spillman Records Management? If so, what 
are the functional and technical requirements? 
 
A38. Yes - for functional requirements see answers to general questions. 
 
Q39. What other systems will be integrated into the new case management system? For each provide 
functional and technical requirements. 
A39. Unknown - however, we hope to interact with the case management system and e-filing system 
that King County is implementing for their criminal cases, but that has not been finalized to-date. We 
anticipate a future request for upgrade or integration and request any general guidance on process, 
capability, general costs for such request.

Q40. Does the scope of the project include file room/records management to track physical paper-
based files? 
 
A40. No.