Request for Information (RFI) 
for 
Cloud Based Internet Isolation Solution 
 
 
Contracting Office Address: 
Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA), Defense Information Technology contracting 
Organization (DITCO) Scott/PL8413. 
 
THIS IS A REQUEST FOR INFORMATION (RFI) NOTICE ONLY. THIS IS NOT A 
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP). NO SOLICITATION IS AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME. 
 
1. Description: 
The DISA Requirements and Analysis Office (RAO) is conducting this Request for Information 
(RFI) for a Cloud Based Internet Isolation Capability to support the Agency’s EndPoint Security 
Solutions. 
 
2. Scope of Effort 
The Enterprise Cloud Based Internet Isolation capability will provide defense against a variety of 
attacks that exploit Department of Defense (DoD) networks and compromise end clients. The 
service will redirect the act of internet browsing from the end user’s desktop into a remote server, 
external to the DoDIN, and deliver as a cloud based service leveraging concurrent (simultaneous) 
use licenses at ~60% of the total user base (3.1 Million users). The solution shall utilize multiple 
geographic locations as necessary which could include the following sites: Warner Robins (GA), 
Columbus (OH), San Antonio (TX), North Island (CA), Pentagon (DC), Hampton Roads (VA), 
Yokota (Japan), Ramstein (Germany), Stuttgart (Germany), and Hickam (HI). The solution must 
be compliant with federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) 140-2 cryptographic 
modules, support DoD Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) authentication either natively or via token 
from an authentication proxy, be compatible with all DoD approved browsers, and utilize DoD 
provided Directory service for user profiles. The system shall be housed in FedRamp level II 
certified data center(s). The vendor will provide host and build SaaS and will be responsible for 
system setup, maintenance of servers, middleware, and O/S, support, and hosting/sustainment. 
 
3. Technical Characteristics 
The Enterprise Cloud Based Internet Isolation capability will consist of the following areas: 
 
a. The solution shall provide for the ability to send either all or a configurable 
portion of user Internet activity at the browser to a Cloud-based vendor solution 
external to the DoDIN 
i. Shall isolate all Internet code execution in the cloud 
ii. Shall isolate each session in the cloud 
iii. Shall support Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) and grant system 
administrators access to configure as required by the user role 
iv. Shall support data encryption and encrypt the connection between the user 
endpoint and system host 
v. Shall support XSF stripping 
vi. Shall provide the ability to downgrade video and audio quality for 
streaming Internet media (configurable QOS) 
vii. Shall provide compression to limit bandwidth utilized in delivering 
rendering of isolated Cloud session back to the client workstation

b. The solution shall securely store and transmit data in a manner that ensures the 
confidentiality, integrity, availability, and source authenticity of the data. 
c. The solution shall include a content control software at the host location 
i. Shall provide for persistent document storage in the cloud 
1. Shall scan persistent documents for malicious code/infection 
before storing 
2. Shall provide intrusion protection for persistent document storage 
commensurate with protections in the NIST SP 800-122 required 
for storing PII 
ii. Shall allow blacklisting and whitelisting URLs by category, geolocation, 
and uncategorized URL blocking 
1. Shall provide for updating ‘uncategorized’ URL with 
categorization provided by user within 0-1 hour 
2. Must provide the user the ability to update a blacklisted site to a 
whitelisted site if wrongly categorized within 0-1 hour 
iii. Shall allow and block file downloads/uploads by file type; allow to open 
downloaded files within the cloud session 
d. The solution shall log all web requests and tie the web request to specific users 
from authentication through session end 
i. Capture logs from content control software, blacklisting/whitelisting, data 
about downloaded files, logs based on geolocation and capture geolocation 
within the logs 
ii. Log data can inform analysis and facilitate threat sharing with other 
systems such as Security Information and Event Management (SIEMs) 
and perimeter based defenses 
e. The solution shall have the ability to allow distinct groups to set thresholds for 
Internet usage on a per-client basis; send notification to the user if daily 
bandwidth threshold is within a configurable percentage of being met, has been 
met, has been exceeded, and send an automated e-mail to designated e-mail 
address(s) if threshold has been exceeded by a configurable amount 
f. The system shall provide non-repudiation of browser activity 
i. Shall support all current and legacy web content technologies, support 
Java, Flash, Silverlight, HTML, Windows 10, mobile devices running 
DISA-supposed version of Android and iOS, and common web browsers 
(i.e., IE, Firefox, Chrome, Edge) 
g. The system shall support the ability to configure the user session inactivity 
timeout 
h. The system shall support connections to websites utilizing SSL 3.0 and TLS 1.0-
1.3 
i. The system shall be able to meet the following performance criteria: 
i. Shall be able to provide information near real-time 
ii. Shall support a start time from opening the client to the browsing session 
start of no more than 5 seconds 
iii. Shall offer a latency of no more than 100ms from the nearest DoDIN 
meetme router location to the service host 
iv. Shall support 10 Gbps throughput minimally. 
v. Shall be available 99% of the time 
vi. Shall support Recovery Time Objective of 0-1 hours 
vii. Shall support browsing concurrent tabs of >25 without drop in configured 
QOS

Requested Information: 
Responses must specifically describe the contractor’s capability to meet the requirements 
outlined in this RFI. Additionally, the respondents shall submit commercial pricing for the cost 
of system setup, maintenance, support, and hosting/sustainment. 
 
a) Describe your experience managing the technical and functional activities associated with 
operations, maintenance, modifications, engineering, integration, deployment, schedule, 
and sustainment of Enterprise Cloud Based Internet Isolation solutions. 
b) Describe, if applicable, prior experience and working knowledge of Enterprise Cloud 
Based Internet Isolation solutions. 
c) Describe your experience in supporting or implementing system Certification and 
Accreditation (C&A) efforts through the DoD Risk Management Framework (RMF) by 
providing examples of successfully fielded system deployments. 
d) With consideration to the technical characteristics and requirement’s scope, recommend a 
method in which the Enterprise Cloud Based Internet Isolation capability would be 
delivered to the Government. If your firm is capable of delivering the capability solely, 
provide an estimated timeline. If your firm recommends partnering with other 
contractors, detail the development and integration efforts needed to provide a single 
solution. 
 
To accomplish the tasks outlined, all capability and functional requirements for the effort are 
required. Work for this capability may be conducted on and off government facilities; all 
responses to this RFI should define the proposed work location and infrastructure hosting 
methodology based on scope and statutory requirements. Please note that all contractor personnel 
supporting the Government’s requirement will be required to possess, at minimum, a current 
DoD Secret clearance at contract award. 
 
Response Guidelines 
 
The anticipated North American Industry Classification System Code (NAICS) for this 
requirement is 541512, with the corresponding size standard of $27.5M. 
This RFI is encouraging responses from any qualified and capable sources, including Small 
Businesses, Service Disabled-Veteran Owned Small Businesses, Veteran-Owned Small 
Businesses, Women-owned Small Businesses, HUBZone Small Businesses, Small 
Disadvantaged Small Businesses, , Small Business Joint Ventures, Consortiums and Teaming 
Partners. 
 
In order to make a determination for a small business set-aside, two or more qualified and 
capable small businesses must submit responses that demonstrate their qualifications. Responses 
must demonstrate the company’s ability to perform in accordance with the Limitations on 
Subcontracting clause (FAR 52.219-14). 
 
Interested parties are requested to respond to this RFI with a white paper. Submissions cannot 
exceed 12 pages, single spaced, 12-point type with at least one-inch margins on 8 1/2” X 11” 
page size. The response should not exceed a 5 MB e-mail limit for all items associated with the 
RFI response. Responses must specifically describe the contractor’s capability to meet the 
requirements outlined in this RFI. Oral communications are not permissible. FedBizOpps will 
be the sole repository for all information related to this RFI.

Proprietary information and trade secrets, if any, must be clearly marked on all materials. All 
information received that is marked Proprietary will be handled accordingly. Please be advised 
that all submissions become Government property and will not be returned. 
 
Companies who wish to respond to this RFI should send responses via email no later than July 
11, 2018 at 1:00 PM EST to the following: 
 
Project Team Lead: Tatyana McHenry 
Email: tatyana.a.mchenry.civ@mail.mil 
Deputy Project Lead: Ankit Joshi 
Email: ankit.p.joshi.civ@mail.mil 
 
INDUSTRY DISCUSSIONS: 
 
DISA representatives may choose to meet with potential offerors and hold one-on-one 
discussions. Such discussions would only be intended to obtain further clarification of potential 
capability to meet the requirements, including any development and certification risks. 
QUESTIONS: 
Questions regarding this announcement shall be submitted in writing by e-mail to 
tatyana.a.mchenry.civ@mail.mil. Verbal questions will NOT be accepted. The Government will 
not reimburse companies for any costs associated with the submissions of their responses 
DISCLAIMER: 
This RFI is not a Request for Proposal (RFP) and is not to be construed as a commitment by the 
Government to issue a solicitation or ultimately award a contract. Responses will not be 
considered as proposals nor will any award be made as a result of this synopsis. 
All information contained in the RFI is preliminary as well as subject to modification and is in 
no way binding on the Government. FAR clause 52.215-3, “Request for Information or 
Solicitation for Planning Purposes”, is incorporated by reference in this RFI. The Government 
does not intend to pay for information received in response to this RFI. Responders to this 
invitation are solely responsible for all expenses associated with responding to this RFI. This 
RFI will be the basis for collecting information on capabilities available. This RFI is issued 
solely for information and planning purposes. Proprietary information and trade secrets, if any, 
must be clearly marked on all materials. All information received in this RFI that is marked 
“Proprietary” will be handled accordingly. Please be advised that all submissions become 
Government property and will not be returned nor will receipt be confirmed. In accordance with 
FAR 15.201(e), responses to this RFI are not offers and cannot be accepted by the Government 
to form a binding contract.