This topic provides a reference for the Project Center RFI activity center. 
Purpose 
The RFI activity center enables you to effectively log and track RFIs through their approval process. 
Audience 
Architects, engineers, construction professionals, and owners. 
Key Features 
• 
Streamline RFI management. 
• 
Manage construction-related project information. 
• 
Capture and connect interrelated contract management work processes. 
Received RFI Workflow 
The following workflow options are available for tracking received RFIs in the project. Not all steps have to 
be used. 
 
To log a received RFI from email 
You can log a received RFI directly from an email message. 
1. Highlight the email, select the dropdown arrow by File in Project and then select File As. 
 
2. In the Select Project dialog box, double-click on the corresponding project to select it.

3. In the File As dialog box, select the New Item radio button and RFI from the Project Item Type 
list to log a new RFI. Complete the information in the Log a Received RFI dialog box as needed and 
select OK. 
To log a received RFI from Info Exchange 
External users can be given access to your Info Exchange site so they can send you RFIs directly from the 
site. 
See the Project Team Overview for more information on granting external users 
access to Info Exchange. 
1. You will receive an email notification that an RFI was sent to you through Info Exchange. Follow the 
link in the email to the RFIs activity center. 
2. Select Receive Pending RFI from the Tasks panel. 
 
3. Complete the information in the Log a Received RFI dialog box as needed and select OK. 
 
To log a received RFI from the RFI activity center 
You can also log a received RFI directly through the activity center. This is how you log documents 
received in hard copy or messages received via phone or fax. 
Download or scan files needed before logging the RFI. 
1. In the RFIs activity center, select New RFI > Log Received RFI from the Tasks panel. 
 
2. Complete the information in the Log a Received RFI dialog box as needed. 
3. Use the Description of Contents tab to track physical samples and items.

4. You can add scanned files or files downloaded from another site to the Received Files tab. 
 
 
To forward an RFI for review 
RFIs can be forwarded for review to multiple internal and external reviewers. 
1. In the RFIs activity center, highlight the RFI and select Forward for Review from the Tasks panel. 
 
2. Select any files to send to the reviewers in the Select Files to Forward for Review dialog box and 
select OK. 
Internal reviewers will see all associated files when they view the RFI through the RFI 
activity center so forwarding files may not be necessary. 
3. Complete the information in the Forward RFI for Review dialog box as needed. 
If you choose to send via email, Newforma prepares a notification email. Look for the 
Microsoft Outlook icon flashing in the Windows toolbar indicating the email is ready to 
send. 
To record a reviewer response in the RFI activity center 
Reviewers' responses can be recorded in the RFI activity center from email or from a response sent 
through Info Exchange. 
1. In the RFIs activity center, highlight the RFI and select Record Reviewer Response from the Tasks 
panel.

2. Record your comments in the Response box on the Response tab. 
 
3. Add any files to the Associated Files tab. 
 
4. Select Record Response to save your changes. 
To record a reviewer response from email 
When a reviewer responds to an RFI via email, you can record the response directly from Outlook. 
1. In Outlook, highlight the email you want to log as a reviewer response, then select the drop-down 
arrow for the File in Project button in the Project Center Add-In for Microsoft Outlook toolbar. 
Select File As from the drop-down menu. 
 
2. In the Select Project dialog box, double-click on the corresponding project to select it. 
3. In the File As dialog box, select Reviewer Response and select RFI as the Project Item Type to 
pick from the list of expected RFIs in the Choose Project Item dialog box. Complete the 
information in the Record Reviewer Response for RFI dialog box as needed.

To record a reviewer response from Info Exchange 
Reviewers can respond to an RFI through Info Exchange. You will receive an email notifying you of the 
sent response. 
1. In the RFIs activity center, select Pending Incoming from the category drop-down list. Highlight the 
appropriate RFI and select Receive Pending Review Response in the Tasks panel. 
 
2. Complete the information in the Record Reviewer Response for RFI dialog box as needed. 
 
To respond and close 
Use this option to track your response to the RFI and close it within Newforma. 
1. In the RFIs activity center, highlight the RFI and select Close > Respond and Close from the Tasks 
panel. 
 
2. In the Select Files to Send dialog box, select any files you want to send with the response. Any 
files included in a reviewer response are selected by default. Select OK.

3. Complete the information in the Respond to RFI and Close dialog box. You can use the response 
widget to copy a full summary of the RFI activity or just a summary of the reviewer responses in the 
Response field. 
 
4. Click Create to close the RFI and create the response.

Initiate RFI Workflow 
The following workflow options are available for tracking RFIs that you initiate for the project. Not all steps 
have to be used. 
 
 
To create an RFI from the RFIs activity center 
You can log and track RFIs you create directly through the activity center. 
1. In the RFIs activity center, select New RFI > Create RFI. 
 
2. Enter any information as needed in the Create RFI dialog box. Use the Question tab for the content 
of your question and the Supporting Documents tab for any files. 
 
3. Click OK to create the RFI. 
The new RFI is listed in a Draft state until it is forwarded or closed.

To close an RFI 
After sending the RFI for review and recording the reviewer's response as needed, you can log the answer 
and close the RFI in Newforma. 
1. In the RFI activity center, highlight the RFI and select Close > Close from the Tasks panel. 
 
2. Complete the information in the Close RFI dialog box. You can use the response widget to copy a 
full summary of the RFI activity or just a summary of the reviewer responses in the Response field. 
 
3. Select OK to close the RFI. 
 
To send and close an RFI 
Use this option to track your response to the RFI and close it within Newforma. 
1. In the RFIs activity center, highlight the submittal and select Close > Respond and Close from the 
Tasks panel.

2. In the Select Files to Send dialog box, select any files you want to send with the response. Any 
files included in a reviewer response are selected by default. Click OK. 
 
3. Complete the information in the Respond to RFI and Close dialog box. You can use the response 
widget to copy a full summary of the RFI activity or just a summary of the reviewer responses in the 
Response field. 
 
4. Click Create to close the RFI and create the response.

To view RFIs on Info Exchange 
Internal and external users can see the RFIs log on Info Exchange. By default, external users only see 
items in the workflow that they sent or received. 
1. Log into the Info Exchange website and select the project, then select View > Contract 
Management > RFIs. 
 
 
2. You can use the RFIs category dropdown list to filter the list of RFIs by status.

3. You can view the workflow for any RFI. 
 
 
4. When you need to access the data in different formats you can export to a variety of file formats from 
the website.