UNINTERRUPTIBLE
POWER
SUPPLY
BATTERY
ACCEPTANCE/CAPACITY
TEST PROCEDURE
Developed for BA TTCON97
by Michael P. O'Brien
of Nolan Battery
Company
This procedure
supplements existing industry standards and is intended to provide the user with the minimum recommended
acceptance/capacity test procedures for Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) batteries.
Additionally, this procedure describes two
different methods ofioading a UPS battery during an acceptance/capacity
test. Both methods are technically correct and will be
discussed later in this procedure. It is the user's responsibility to determine which test method is the most technically correct for their
respective UPS installation.
Acceptance
Test.
A constant load capacity test conducted on a new battery installation to determine that the battery meets
specifications or manufacturer's ratings.
Valve Regulated
Lead-Acid
Cell.
A lead-acid cell that is normally sealed via a pressure relieflregulating valve. The gaseous
products of electrolysis are normally contained within the cell and recombine to form water.
Flooded CeO. A lead-acid cell in which the gaseous products of electrolysis and evaporation are allowed to escape to the atmosphere
as they are generated.
[I]
ANSI/lEEE 450-1995, IEEE Recommended Practice for Maintenance, Testing, and Replacement of Large lead Storage
Batteries for Generating Stations and Substations.
[2]
ANSI/IEEE
484-1996,
IEEE Recommended
Practice for Installation Design and Installation of Large Lead Storage
Batteries for Generating Stations and Substations.
Note:
While the IEEE Standards
listed above were written primarily for generating
stations and substations,
the
information and practices contained in these Standards are applicable to UPS lead-acid battery installations.
As new
standards
are developed and published, portions
of this procedure
may need to be revised to comply with the new
standards.

Capacity testing is a very important part of a comprehensive battery maintenance program.
Regularly scheduled capacity testing is
a key part ofIEEE/ANSI
Standard 450-1995, which specifies minimum acceptable standards for maintenance of large lead acid
storage batteries.
Capacity testing serves three main purposes.
First, capacity testing determines the actual capacity of the battery. Second, capacity
testing determines if the battery can support the connected load for the specified time. Third, capacity testing will reveal internal
conduction path problems that cannot be detected by other means.
5.1
General: A capacity test is basically a constant load discharge of the battery to a specified end voltage. The time required
for the battery voltage to drop to the specified end voltage is then compared with the battery manufacturer's discharge curve
to determine the capacity of the battery. The following paragraphs detail items of paramount importance when conducting
capacity tests.
5.2
Continuous Monitoring: All battery parameters require continuous monitoring.
Continuous monitoring of individual cell
voltages and overall battery voltage is required to detect problems such as high conduction path resistance, low cell voltage
or cell reversal and alarming or terminating the test, as appropriate, on out-of-tolerance conditions.
5.3
Load Control: Maintaining a constant discharge load throughout the test despite changes in battery voltage. This requires
an intelligent or "smart" load unit that can automatically parallel additional load elements to maintain a constant load as the
battery voltage drops during the discharge.
5.4
Data Logging: Automatic data logging should record any change in each monitored parameter providing a complete record
of events and irrefutable data.
5.5
Automatic Test Execution:
This removes the largest and most uncontrollable testing variable, the human element, thus
insuring test repeatability and accurate results.
6.1
General: Personnel safety is of supreme importance!
Batteries are inherently dangerous devices presenting risks of injury
and/or death from electrocution, explosion, fire, and chemical bums.
All flooded cells contain explosive concentrations of
hydrogen and oxygen gas. Individual cells of relatively small size can produce high short circuit currents, (in the area of
1000 to 5000 amps). Larger cells can produce short circuit currents in excess of 10,000 amps. Cell short circuits caused
by maintenance personnel can result in severe injury and/or death from fire, explosion, and chemical bums.
The electrolyte
in lead-acid cells is dilute sulfuric acid. Skin exposure to lead-acid battery electrolyte will generally cause only minor burns
if not promptly treated, however, exposure to the eyes, and/or mucous membranes will cause severe debilitating burns
without immediate first aid.

(4)
All hand tools must be electrically insulated. Tools may be insulated with electrical tape and/or insulating shrink
wrap tubing. When insulating tools, insulate every possible surface that can be insulated while still allowing proper
use of the tool. NOTE:
Don't be stingy with the electrical tape.
Your safety depends on it!
(6)
Batteries
used in some UPS systems are intentionally grounded.
In grounded DC systems all cell posts are
electrically live with respect to earth ground. High voltage UPS battery systems pose a significant electrocution
hazard. Personnel should always be isolated from earth ground when working on grounded DC systems.
7.1
General. The following initial conditions must be met prior to commencing an acceptance test. Failure to meet these initial
conditions will result in invalid test results and the possibility of the battery failing the acceptance test.
NOTE:
If the test to be performed
is a capacity test conducted with the battery in the "asfound" condition, proceed to
step (9).
(3)
Insure that all intercell connection resistances are under the battery manufacture's ceiling value and that there are
no resistances more than 10% or five microhms, whichever is greater, above the average intercell connection
resistance.
(4)
Insure that all battery cabling is properly supported.
Cable connections
should not strain the cell posts!
Improperly supported cables can cause premature post seal failure, high resistance connections and bent or broken
cell posts.
(5)
Insure that all inter-tier/row
cable resistances are under the battery manufacture's
ceiling value.
Like cable
connection resistances should be no more than 10% or five microhms, whichever is greater, above the average
cable connection resistance for similar connections.
(6)
Insure the battery has received a freshening charge.in accordance with the battery manufacturer's instructions and
IEEE/ AN SI Std. 484-1996.
(7)
Review the initial specific gravity and cell voltage readings, taken 72 hours after the termination of the freshening
charge, and insure that all voltage and gravity readings are within the battery manufacturer's specified limits.
(8)
If more than thirty days has elapsed between the termination of the freshening charge and initiation of the
acceptance test, an equalization charge is required.
If required, the equalization charge should be accomplished
in accordance with the battery manufacturer's instructions.
After termination of the equalization charge, allow the
cell voltages and specific gravities to stabilize on float charge for at least 72 hours, but not more than thirty days
before proceeding with the acceptance test.
(9)
Measure and record all cell voltages and specific gravities.
Correct all specific gravity readings for temperature
and level and record the corrected values. NOTE: A temperature compensating
digital hydrometer is strongly
recommended for specific gravity measurements.

(10)
Measure and record the electrolyte temperature of at least 10% of all cells and calculate the average electrolyte
temperature.
Note: On Valve Regulated cells, measure the temperature of the negative posts. During oxygen
recombination the negative plates and post will be slightly warmer then the positives.
8.1
General. There are two industry accepted methods of applying load to a UPS battery during an acceptance/capacity
test.
Each method has its particular advantages; however, both methods, when properly executed, will accurately measure battery
capacity. Regardless of the loading method used, the following battery parameters MUST be monitored during the discharge
test:
(1)
Individual cell voltages. This measurement must include the voltage drop across each cell's associated intercell
connector.
8.2
D.C. Load Bank(s). In this method, computer controlled load bank(s) are used to directly load the battery independent of
the UPS. This requires that the battery be removed from service. The UPS, depending upon its design, may be able to
remain in service as a power conditioner.
This type of test is generally the most repeatable and controllable method of
loading a battery; however, it can be expensive in terms of equipment cost. A major consideration and possible limiting
factor when using computer controlled D.C. load banks are locating them near the battery and dissipating the heat from the
load banks.
8.2.1
Discharge Rate. The discharge rate should be equal to the battery's design reserve time to an end voltage equal to the UPS
"D.C. Under Voltage Shutdown Level."
This information is then compared with the battery manufacturer's
discharge
tables/curves to determine the correct load to place on the battery at 77°F. initial average electrolyte temperature.
8.2.2
Temperature
Compensation.
Batteries produce electrical energy by means of an electrochemical reaction and the speed
of that reaction directly affects battery performance.
The speed of the electrochemical
reaction is directly affected by
electrolyte temperature;
therefore, battery performance
must be corrected to a standard temperature.
The standard
temperature for batteries ofU .S. manufacture is 77°F.
Battery performance data published for cells of U.S. manufacture is only valid when the electrolyte temperature is 77°F.
If the electrolyte temperature is other than 77°F. the discharge load is normally adjusted, up or down, for temperature prior
to starting a discharge test. A temperature correction factor table may be found in IEEE Std. 450-1995.
The temperature
correction factors published in IEEE 450-1995 are only valid for nominal 1.215 specific gravity cells. Additionally, these
temperature correction factors are only valid at the eight-hour discharge rate. Since UPS battery discharge rates are normally
in the ten to thirty minute ranges and many UPS batteries have nominal specific gravities higher that 1.215, the battery
manufacturer should be consulted to obtain the correct temperature correction factor.
8.3
Inverter
Loading.
In this method, an A.C. load is placed on the output of the UPS and then input power to the UPS is
removed causing the battery to discharge into the UPS inverter. This type of test requires that the UPS be removed from
service and isolated from the critical load. The major advantages of this type test are that it is an excellent functional test

of the UPS, since it simulates worst case operating conditions, and the comparatively lower cost of the load equipment.
Standard A.C. load banks can be used in lieu of computer controlled D.C. load banks.
8.3.1
Discharge Rate.
When loading a battery through the inverter section of a UPS, it is not normally possible to accurately
set or specifYthe discharge load on the battery. This is because of variances in individual inverter efficiencies.
Therefore,
the inverter should be loaded to its maximum rated output current via an A.C. load bank(s).
The actual load placed on the
battery will not be known until the test starts. Since the load placed on the battery in this type of test cannot normally be
accurately set or specified prior to starting the test, temperature compensation of the discharge load is not possible.
When
the initialaverage electrolyte temperature is other than 77°F, the test results must be corrected for temperature.
This will
be explained later in the section on calculating capacity.
8.3.2
Emergency Test Termination.
The user must determine how to remove the load from the battery safely and quickly if
an unsafe condition occurs during the test, (over heated connection, cell polarity reversal, etc.).
CAUTION:
Care should be exercised in the positioning of air cooled load units as the heat dissipated during the test
may trigger the building fire alarm system.
If the facility
is equipped with an automatic fire suppression
system,
consideration should be given to inhibiting the automatic activation of thefire suppression system during the discharge
test.
(4)
Using the average initialelectrolyte temperature, from step 7.2.10, select the proper temperature correction factor
and temperature compensate the discharge load.
(5)
Apply the load to the battery. The load must be maintained at the specified level throughout the test until the
battery terminal voltage drops below the specified end voltage.
NOTE:
Capacity tests are not stopped after reaching a specified discharge time. Capacity tests are only terminated
when the battery terminal voltage drops below the specified end voltage.
Example:
End voltage per cell times the
number of cells in series equals the battery terminal end voltage, 1.67 (per cell end voltage) x 180 (cells in series) = 300.6
(battery terminal end voltage). The capacity test would terminate when the battery terminal voltage dropped below 300.6
VDC.
(6)
Check for over heated connections during the test. Ifthe temperature rise across any connection becomes
unacceptable, terminate the test.
NOTE:
High resistance connections appear as low voltage cells during the test. This is because the cell voltage
measurements include the voltage drop across the cell's associated intercell connector.
Normally, (but not always),
a cell showing low voltage during the first thirty to sixty seconds of a capacity test is not truly a low voltage cell but
rather a high resistance connection.

CAUTION:
Cells should not be allowed to go into polarity reversal as this causes irreparable damage to the cell
and can pose a safety hazard.
(8)
At the conclusion of the test, record the elapsed test time, disconnect all test equipment, and return the battery
to service.
CAUTION: Care should be exercised when returning the battery to service. If this battery serves a static UPS that
is still supplying power to the critical load, closing the battery breaker may cause a momentary
under voltage
condition on the output of the UPS. This may adversely affect the critical load and/or cause the UPS to transfer to
the "Bypass" or alternate power source.
CAUTION: UPS systems that are lightly loaded and have no "Battery Charge Current Limit" may supply recharge
currents high enough to cause a significant increase in battery temperature.
This may cause the battery to enter a
"Thermal Runaway" condition that can destroy the battery and pose afire safety hazard.
Valve Regulated Lead-Acid
cells are more prone to thermal runaway than flooded cells. The electrolyte temperature of flooded cells should not
exceed I IfJ'F and, the electrolyte temperature of ValveRegulated Lead-Acid cells should not exceed 95°F to prevent
thermal runaway during battery recharge.
CAUTION:
Care should be exercised in the positioning
of air cooled load units as the heat dissipated during the
test may trigger the buildingfire alarm system. If thefacility is equipped with an automatic fire suppression system,
consideration
should be given to inhibiting the automatic activation of the fire suppression
system during the
discharge test.
NOTE:
It is imperative that battery discharge current be monitored and recorded during the test. The preferred
method for monitoring discharge current is via a D.C. shunt.
A properly sized D.C. shunt is normally far more
accurate than clamp-on D.C. ammeters.
Many UPS systems have an internal D.C. shunt for monitoring battery
charge/discharge
current.
(5)
Open the A.C. input feeder breaker to the UPS simulating an input power failure. This will cause the battery
to discharge into the inverter. Continue the discharge until UPS trips for "D.C. Under Voltage" or the battery
terminal voltage drops below the specified end voltage. The UPS may trip for "D.C. Under Voltage" at a
battery terminal
voltage that is different from the specified battery terminal end voltage.
It is the user's
responsibility
to insure the battery is not over discharged because of a faulty "D.C. Under Voltage Trip"
circuit.
NOTE: Capacity tests are not stopped after reaching a specified discharge time. Capacity tests are only terminated
when the battery terminal voltage drops below the specified end voltage.
Example:
End voltage per cell times the
number of cells in series equals the battery terminal end voltage, 1.67 (per cell end voltage) x 180 (cells in series)
= 300.6 (battery terminal end voltage). The capacity test would terminate when the battery terminal voltage dropped
below 300.6 VDC.

(6)
Check for over heated connections during the test. If the temperature rise across any connection becomes
unacceptable, terminate the test.
NOTE: High resistance connections will show as low voltage cells during the test. This is because the cell voltage
measurements include the voltage drop across the cell's associated intercell connector.
Normally, (but not always),
a cell showing low voltage during thefirst thirty to sixty seconds of a capacity test is not truly a low voltage cell but
rather a high resistance connection.
CAUTION:
Cells should not be allowed to go into polarity reversal as this causes irreparable damage to the cell
and can pose a safety hazard.
(8)
At the conclusion of the test, record the elapsed test time, disconnect all test equipment, and return the battery
to service.
CAUTION:
UPS systems that are lightly loaded and have no "Battery Charge Current Limit" may supply recharge
currents high enough to cause a significant increase in battery temperature.
This may cause the battery to enter a
"Thermal Runaway" condition that can destroy the battery and pose a significant fire safety hazard.
Valve Regulated
Lead-Acid cells are more prone to thermal runaway than flooded cells. The electrolyte temperature offlooded
cells
should not exceed ]]fJ'F. and, the electrolyte temperature of Valve Regulated Lead-Acid cells should not exceed 95°F.
to prevent thermal runaway during battery recharge.
10.1
D.C. Load Bank(s).
The capacity calculation for this test method is very simple. Divide the actual test time, (how
long the test actually ran), by the specified test time, (how long should the battery have lasted), and then multiply the
product by one hundred. The equation is shown below:
% capacity at 7rF = L!x 100
Ts
where:
Ta = actual test time
Ts = specified test time
10.2
Inverter Loading.
Capacity calculations for this test method are generally more complex because the actual discharge
load is not known nor can the load be temperature corrected to 77°F prior to test initiation.
(1)
Determine the kilowatt loading of the battery by multiplying the current readings by the voltage readings.
All
the kilowatt calculations should be approximately the same.
(2)
If the initial average electrolyte temperature
is other than 77°F the calculation must be corrected for
temperature. To correct the calculation for temperature, multiply the total battery kilowatt loading, (from the
previous step), by the appropriate temperature correction factor, (see 8.2.2).
(3)
Determine the kilowatts per cell by dividing the total temperature corrected battery kilowatt loading, (from
the previous step), by the number of cells in the battery.

(4)
Determine the average per cell end voltage by dividing the actual battery terminal end voltage by the number
of cells in series.
(5)
Compare the temperature corrected kilowatts per cell, (from step (3) above), and the average per cell end
voltage, (from step (4) above), to the battery manufacturer's per cell kilowatt chart to determine the specified
test time, (how long the battery should have lasted).
(6)
Calculate the battery capacity by dividing the actual test time, (how long the test actually ran), by the specified
test time, (from step 5 above), and then multiply the product by one hundred. The equation is shown below:
% capacity at 77°F =il x 100
Ts
where:
Ta = actual test time
Ts = specified test time
Temperature
correction factor from IEEE 450-1995
and confirmed by the battery manufacturer,
(see
paragraph 8.2.2):
1.064
617KW = 3.427 KW per cell

300.6 = 1.67 Volts per cell

Capacity calculation:
12.5 x 100 = 96.2% capacity

10.3
Weak Cells. Analyze the test data to determine ifthere are any weak cells in the battery. A weak cell is any cell with
a capacity 10% or more below the battery capacity. Individual cell capacity can be determined by substituting the time
that the cell voltage fell below the specified end voltage for liTa" in the capacity formula.
10.4
Defective Cells.
Analyze the test data to determine if there are any defective cells in the battery. A defective cell is
any cell with a capacity of80% or less. Individual cell capacity can be determined by substituting the time that the cell
voltage fell below the specified end voltage for liTa" in the capacity formula.

The industry accepted replacement criteria for rectangular pasted plate cells, (most stationary batteries), is to replace the battery
when the measured capacity drops to 80% of the manufacture's rated capacity. This replacement criterion is valid for batteries
sized in accordance with IEEE 485. Unfortunately, most UPS batteries are not sized in accordance with the spirit or intent of
IEEE 485 and therefore may require replacement at higher capacities.
When most UPS batteries are sized, no aging factor,
temperature correction factor, or cable loss corrections are used. This means the battery will only support full rated UPS load
when electrolyte temperature is 77°F or greater and the battery has more than 100% of rated capacity. In these instances, the
UPS user must determine how much battery reserve time is required for their respective installation. This would then be used
as the battery replacement criteria as long as the battery capacity was greater than 80%. All rectangular pasted plate lead-acid
cells should be replaced when the measured capacity drops to 80% of the manufacturer's rated capacity regardless of connected
load.
12.1
Short Duration
Flooded
Lead-Acid
Cells: Batteries comprised of flooded cells with a design discharge time of one-
hour or less should receive annual capacity tests.
12.2
Long Duration
Flooded Lead-Acid
Cells: Batteries comprised of flooded cells with a design discharge time greater
than one-hour should be tested according to the following schedule:
(2)
Conduct a Capacity Test after the battery has been in service for two years and every three years thereafter
until the battery reaches 85% of its design life or shows signs of degradation.
(3)
Conduct annual Capacity Tests on batteries that exceed 85% of their rated design life or show signs of
degradation. Signs of degradation are a drop of capacity of 10% or more from the previous capacity test or
when the capacity is less than 90% of the manufacturer's rated capacity.
12.2
Valve Regulated
Lead-Acid
Cells:
Batteries comprised of Valve Regulated Lead-Acid Cells should receive annual
capacity tests.