SCHEDULE - I " 
 
TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS FOR DESIGN, MANUFACTURE, TESTING AT SHOP AND SUPPLY, 
INSTALLATION & COMMISSIONING OF UPS SYSTEM, ITS ACCESSORIES AND ALLIED WORKS AT SITE: 
 
The UPS being the own design of the UPS vendor, it shall be suitably designed manufactured, tested at 
shop and supplied. The design standards, materials or components used manufacturing process shall all 
conform to the respective BIS Code and any other standards mentioned elsewhere in this tender as 
applicable. However, the following specifications, technical parameters, etc, are furnished by way of 
basic or minimum requirement for the end result. The tenderer shall be solely responsible for the 
entire design/ specification, safety aspects of the entire UPS system and related works as detailed in 
the tender notwithstanding the specifications furnished hereunder. 
 
A. SCOPE OF SUPPLY: 
 
1. The Main System: ON-LINE Un-interrupted Power Supply (UPS) System comprising of 1 set of 5 + 5 
KVA UPS with hot standby configuration as per the details indicated in the price bid, battery source, 
related software for interface compatible with lan / unix system shall be designed by the 
manufacturers own technology and standards but it shall also meet the required parameters detailed 
below apart from the standard design parameters of the manufacturers. They shall be manufactured, 
tested at factory for its quality and performance. Such units shall be supplied, installed and 
commissioned at site and undertaking allied works like interlinking UPS system with battery, input 
power supply to the UPS system, output etc. 
 
2. Hot standby Operation: 
 
In nutshell, the whole system comprising of one set 5 + 5 KVA UPS systems should be configured in 
hot standby mode with common battery bank with iron stand. WITH Supply, Install, 
Commission & Testing UPS COMPATIBLE WITH EXISTING ( 
ALREADY PRESENT ) 16 Nos 100 Ah SMF Batteries . 
For Hot standby operation of one set 5 + 5 KVA UPS systems, where load is taken up by first UPS, in 
case of failure of first UPS the load should be fully taken over the other, without interruption. 
 
If both the UPS fails, the loads should be transferred to bypass without interruption in power 
supply. 
 
The design of the UPS should be such that where shall not be any common parts in the circuit, 
which will lead to single point failure. 
 
It should be possible to isolate the failed UPS for repairs without the power output of other UPS. 
 
3. System Maintenance: 
 
Each UPS system will be serviceable independently and at the same time at-least one UPS system 
should be available to serve load. Any scheduled maintenance actively will be carried out without 
disrupting load at any point of time. 
 
4. ACCESSORIES: 
 
 Copper cable of 90% and above purity of appropriate size and current carrying capacity between 
battery source and UPS system should be used. The cable size, the current carrying capacity should be 
highlighted. The type of copper cable should be mentioned. Any other unspecified but related to 
installation of UPS system, materials required for fixing the UPS system. 
 
5. INSTALLATION & COMMISSIONING:

Moving, unloading & Positioning of UPS system alongwith necessay electrical, batteries and 
interconnections etc. Cabling between batteries to UPS system and between UPS system to the input 
power source and output power point. Necessary pre-commissioning, testing and load testings for 24 
hours upon installation should be conducted by the successful vendor. 
 
6. Drawings & Manuals : Being a self designed electrical equipment, preparation and 
submission of drawings, submission of users manual, operation and preventive measures to be 
taken etc., shall be furnished in duplicate and all other details that are essential for its operations. 
 
7. Site Conditions: The various aspects and the condition of the site and layout needs to be well 
understood in executing the specified work. The input power to the UPS system could be either by 
way of Electricity Board Power or by means of DG Power. The UPS system shall be capable of receiving 
either source of power at fluctuating voltage and frequency and deliver the design output conditions as 
specified in para B of this schedule. The location will be within the specified City limits and with 
its inherent conditions. 
 
 
8. Bank's Scope of Work : The Bank shall arrange for input power supply with necessary input 
supply. Necessary input and output cabling up to the designated point of UPS location, and output 
distribution cabling and control system will be undertaken by the bank. However the necessary 
assistance & guidance shall be under the scope of the supplier. Existing earthing arrangement shall be 
extended to the system. 
 
9. The below mentioned specifications furnished are broad guidelines for the UPS system base` on the 
tenderer's own design and manufactures standard system. Wherever the specifications are not 
furnished or specific, the specification shall be as per their respective IS standards / ISO standards or 
as per best engineering practice and they shall not be diluted. 
 
 (B) TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS FOR 5 + 5 KVA DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING(DSP) 
 CONTROLLED ON LINE IGBT UPS SYSTEM: 
 
Specifications
Bank’s Requirement
Technology
a. UPS systems with DSP controlled IGBT 
based rectifier technology in True on line 
configuration with double conversion using 
IGBTS in the inverter and converter. 
b. Provision for configuring 2 UPS systems in 
parallel load sharing mode. 
c. 
UPS 
should 
consist 
of 
converter/ 
Rectifier, Battery Charger, Static Inverter 
with static switches, Static bypass switch 
and isolation transformer 
d. Input Active power factor correction 
Rating (output power max.)
5 + 5 KVA UPS System with common battery 
bank 
Power Consumption
Full Load – 8.0 KW & 35 Amps
75% Load – 7.5 KW & 32 Amps 
Model Name 
Model No. 
Manufactured by 
INPUT
Phase 
Nominal Input Voltage 
Nominal Input Voltage Range 
Frequency 
Nominal frequency Range 
Single Phase 
230 Volts AC 
+ or - 25% AC (on full load) 
50 HZ 
45 Hz to 65 HZ

Input Power Factor with auto input P.F 
correction system 
DG Compatibility 
Input over voltage protection 
Input under voltage protection 
Rectifier 
Input Current THD 
Better than 0.96
 
Should be provided 
Should be provided 
Should be provided 
IGBT 
Less than or equal to 4% 
OUTPUT
Phase 
Output Voltage 
Output Voltage Range 
Frequency 
DG Compatibility 
Rectifier 
Input Current THD 
 
Single Phase 
230 Volts AC 
+ or – 1 % V AC (on full load) 
50 HZ 
Should be provided 
IGBT 
Less than or equal to 5% 
Isolation Transformer
 
UPS output is isolated from mains input and 
battery (Galvanic Isolation Transformer) 
Audible Alarm for
a) Battery Low 
b) Mains Failure 
c) UPS Failures 
 
Battery re-charge time from fully discharged 
to 100% charged condition 
 
Cold start 
Required 
Required 
Required 
 
Should not exceed 12 hours 
 
 
The facility to start the UPS even if main 
power is not there at the time of starting. 
The system should draw current from the 
batteries and start. This should be 
demonstrated at the time of installation. 
Charger Type
 
 
 
 
 
Voltage Regulation 
 
Ripple(Without Batteries ) 
 
Battery Recharge Time from fully discharged 
condition to 100% charged condition. 
Constant Voltage, Constant Current (The 
charger should be designed for atleast 15% 
of total battery current). The charger should 
be preferably temperature compensated 
with automatic battery test. 
 
+/ - 1% 
 
< 1% 
 
Should not exceed 12 hours 
Transient Response 
 
Response Time 
+/- 5% (100 % load step)
 
Less than 60 mili seconds 
Automatic Static by-pass switch facility to 
mains in case of UPS failure 
Should be provided & should take care of 
100% uninterrupted transfer of load from 
UPS (synchronous bi-directional static switch 
with zero transfer time). 
Manual By-Pass Switch
Built-in Manual By-Pass should be provided
Overall Efficiency( AC to AC )
Greater than 92 % in online mode
Display Panel
Built in LCD/LED Display
Input Voltage 
Output Voltage

Heat Sink Temperature 
Battery Voltage 
Output Current (%) 
Output Frequency etc 
Indications
AC Mains line 
Battery on 
Mains abnormal/ out of range 
Load on UPS 
Load on battery 
Inverter mode 
Load on Auxiliary/ bypass 
Inverter trip 
Protection for(Audible alarms should be 
provided for important protections) 
Input MCB 
Input single phasing/ reversing 
Rectifier Over/ under Voltage Battery MCB 
Battery Low 
Battery Charging Current Limit Output under 
Voltage 
Output Over voltage, 
Inverter over Temperature 
Output Overload 
Output Short circuit etc, overheat 
Surge Protection 
Interface facility 
The UPS system should have necessary 
hardware and software 
a) RS 232 to work on existing operating 
systems 
b) Remote Management. 
 
There should be a facility to monitor and 
broadcast to all workstations, whenever 
necessary, conditions such as 
1. Power failure: UPS working on 
batteries 
preferably 
to 
indicate 
present load in percentage, time up 
to which batteries can support with 
present load & warning well in 
advance of shutdown of the system. 
2. The Software should be capable of 
automatically closing files so that 
data on our computers is not 
lost/corrupted. 
Environmental
Operating Temperature 
Storage Temperature 
Humidity 
Audibkle Noise Level 
 
Cooling 
Enclosure Protection 
0 - 45 Deg C ( Continuous ) 
0 - 55 Deg C 
10-90% ( Non Condensing ) 
< 52 dB at full load upto distance 
 of 1 mtr forced air 
IP 20 
Warranty
UPS should have 2 year warranty from the 
date of supply 
External Testing Certificate
Must

SPECIAL CONDITIONS AND DETAILS OF TESTING TO BE UNDERTAKEN FOR THE WORK OF SUPPLY, 
INSTALLATION, & COMMISSIONING OF 5 + 5 KVA UPS SYSTEM : 
 
1.0. Time is The Essence of Contract : The tenderer are requested to note that the UPS system is to 
be provided for Bank's sensitive equipments and if for any reasons the work of supply & commissioning 
is delayed the Bank's reputation and commitments will be affected and penalty stipulated as per 
liquidated damages will be levied with-out any requirement on the part of the Bank to establish the 
actual loss in monetary terms. This aspect shall be the terms of this tender and will be binding on the 
tenderers. 
 
2.0. Power Consumption: Being a techno-economic project, the power consumption, overall efficiency 
of the UPS system, AMC charges and annual recurring expenditure shall be assessed and these aspects 
shall be one of the criteria in evaluating the cost economics besides the initial capital cost. Therefore 
the tenderer shall furnish the required particulars to establish the economics. The rated performance 
shall be subject to testing and any shortfall shall be liable for penalization. 
 
The details of power consumption of the entire UPS system at input level, including the battery 
charging power shall be furnished for at full load conditions AND at 75 % load conditions Further, its 
corresponding Invertor efficiency and overall efficiency shall also be furnished. 
 
3.0. The tenders shall quote for a TWO YEAR WARRANTY for all the equipment quoted by them. 
 
4.0. MAINTAINANCE OF UPS EQUIPMENT 
 
A) MAINTAINCE DURING DEFECT LIABILITY PERIOD OR WARRANTY PERIOD 
 
The tenderer shall maintain the UPS Equipment free of cost and ensure that it works as per tender 
parameters. All spares required for normal operation as per tendered parameters shall be replaced at 
no extra cost. The number of visits shall be same as stipulated in Comprehensive Annual Maintenance. 
 
B) COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL MAINTAINANCE. (CAM) (after the defect liability period) 
 
The tenderer shall maintain the UPS equipment for a period of Five years after the expiry of defect 
liability period and ensure that it works as per the tendered parameters. The rate of annual 
maintenance charges shall be furnished for a period of 5 years after the expiry of warranty/defect 
liability period and the rates quoted shall be binding on the tenderer. 
 
5.0 The testing & performance parameters : 
 
 The following pre-delivery test shall be conducted at factory /manufacturing place and necessary test 
certificates shall be furnished before dispatch for all the technical parameters including the full load 
test as specified. 
 
 1>. Line Regulation Test & No- load regulation test 
 2>. Load Regulation Test at full, & 75% load. 
 ( on both resistive & reactive load @ 0.8 pf) 
 3>. Overloading Conditions 
 4>. Invertor Efficiency at full load. 
 5>. Overall Efficiency at full load. 
 6>. Transient Response 
 7>. Response (Recovery) Time 
 8>. Testing of Protection; Short Circuit, Under / Over 
 Voltage conditions. 
 9>. Total harmonic distortions. 
 10>. Load Crest Factor. 
 11> Wave form test on resistive and inductive load

12> Noise level test 
 13> Battery backup time cutoff and alarms test at site. 
 
After, physical installation, the UPS shall be tested and commissioned at site by the manufacturers 
engineers such as voltage, frequency, input current, harmonic distortion, output voltage harmonic 
distortion, input power factor, efficiency, noise level, overload capacity as specified herein. 
 
The power consumption shall be established at site by using standard power analyzers using 
external load brought by the tenderer for a continuous period of 24 hours. Load test shall also be 
established at site by using an external load to be brought at specified time as decided by the bank. 
All the activities under this clause shall be completed within the stipulated time schedule. 
 
6. EXTERNAL TESTING: Testing of UPS should be carried out from reputed testing centers like 
Electronics Test and Development Centre, (ETDC) Dept. of Electronics, Govt. of India, or CPRI 
Bangalore or other reputed testing centre approved by the Government of India. The tenderer shall 
be liable to subject the UPS system to such testing. 
 
The cost of such testing and transportation shall be borne by the UPS VENDORS ONLY. Also the cost of 
damages during transportation to the testing centre up & down, rectifications of the system or any 
of its components resulting out of such testings etc. shall be on the part of the tenderer and the 
employer shall not be responsible for any cost or loss incurred by the tenderer while 
undertaking the testings. 
 
7.0. Penalty Clause Against Deviation From Committed Parameters : The tenderer are requested to 
furnish the technical parameters like overall efficiency, power consumption, capacity of the UPS 
system and other technical parameters after careful study. In case the actual parameters obtained 
at site and test results differs from those stipulated in the offers, the tenderer will have to be 
prepared for penalty for the shortfall in the capacity as well as higher power consumption. The 
following methodology shall be adopted for computing the quantum of penalty. A tolerance of 5% of 
the committed parameter in case of power consumption may be condoned by the accepting authority 
at his discretion. 
 
In case of other parameters, as the UPS system is critical in nature, if the shortfall is likely to result in 
un-reliable operating conditions on " ON LINE " concept, the entire UPS may be rejected and the 
contractor is liable for repayment of entire amount paid by the employer and the Initial Security 
Deposit is liable for forfeiture. This is without any prejudice to initiate any legal action by the Bank 
and damages eligible for. The Bank has the option to revoke the Bank Guarantee. 
 
7.1. Capacity of the Equipment: In case of any shortcomings, the difference between the committed 
capacity and the actual capacity measured at site or external testing centre shall be guiding factor to 
determine the quantum of penalty. The pro-rata cost reduction shall be effected by the following 
formula: 
 
Quantum of penalty = Cost of UPS system X Difference X Penalty 
 ( Note-1) in capacity Factor(*N2) 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Committed Capacity of UPS system 
 
Note : 1). Cost of UPS system excludes battery cost & software cost. 
 2). Penalty factor will be 1.5 times. 
 
7.2. Power Consumption: In case of short comings in power consumption, the difference between 
committed value and actual value will be converted into Units per hour (KWH). Excess power 
consumed over a period of 6 years at 8 hours per day on full load condition for 300 days an year 
shall be assessed and 20% of such assessed quantum will be liable for recovery. The actual 
consumption of power will be subject to assessment made by the consultant / Bank Engineer in 
the similar manner while undertaking the assessment made while evaluating the project. The 
accepting authority may at his discretion may evaluate in comparision with other offers and extend 
any or some relief which shall be binding.

9.0 Departure From 
Specification : Schedule of departure from the specification if any, shall be furnished by the 
tenderer in technical and commercial bid along with implication on the system and cost. 
SCHEDULE III 
 
SCOPE OF COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL MAINTAINANCE CONTRACT 
 
The tenderer shall offer the following at no extra cost to the bank. The rate quoted for CAMC should 
include the following. 
 
1. The tenderer shall maintain the UPS System and ensure that it works as per the tendered 
parameters. 
 
2. All the repairs and replacements of spares shall be carried out which are necessitated due to usage 
of system as per tender stipulations. However the repairs and replacements necessitated by loss or 
damage due to misuse or accident, fire or natural calamities shall be out of the scope of CAMC. 
 
3. The tenderer shall inspect the equipment at least once in a month as a part of preventive 
Maintenance. This is apart from any breakdown visits that may be required which may emanate in 
between the two preventive maintenance inspections. 
 
4. The maximum breakdown time shall be one hour from the time of receiving the complaint over 
phone. If the tenderer is not in a position to set right the defect or repair and put back the UPS to 
working condition within one hour, a standby unit of to suit the tender parameters should be 
provided immediately. 
 
5. During the Preventive Maintenance the tenderer shall inspect/ check the equipment and record the 
following in log book, which shall be verified and confirmed by the bank's representative. 
 
a. UPS System : Any malfunctioning of the components. 
 
b. Any other remarks regarding the Electrical System: 
 
c. Any steps to be taken by bank for working of UPS system. 
 
6. During the preventive Maintenance inspection tenderer shall carryout the following apart from the 
other requirements for functioning of system as per tender parameters and same shall be recorded in a 
log book which shall be verified and confirmed by bank's representative. 
 
 UPS System : i. General cleaning. ii. Loose contact. 
 
7. During the break down calls, the nature of repair carried out, parts replaced etc shall be 
recorded in the log book. 
 
 
OTHER TERMS WITH REGARD TO CAMC: 
 
 The rate of annual maintenance charges shall be furnished for a period of 4 years after the 
warranty/Defect Liability Period and rates quoted shall be binding on the tenderer. The scope and 
terms of Annual Maintenance Contract like number of monthly visits, items covering under Annual 
Maintenance Contract, replacement of spares exclusions if any, down time for break down and 
service calls shall be as per as per the bank terms. The Bank reserves the right of discontinuing the 
Annual Maintenance Contract from the contractor during the tenancy of Annual Maintenance 
Contract. The cost of Annual Maintenance Charges shall also be one of the criteria in evaluation of cost 
economics of the tender. 
 
The Annual Maintenance Charges shall be paid once in six months in advance subject to 
satisfactory maintenance for the period of previous six months and on production of bank guarantee 
equal to the amount paid in advance. 
 
 
Sl.
no. 
Item description
Qty & unit

The UPS vendor has to maintain the equipment supplied for at-least 10 years after the expiry of 
warranty period. At the same time, the vendor is expected to make available the spare parts for the 
systems for atleast 10 years after the expiry of warranty period. Thereafter, vendor will give 12 months 
notice prior to discontinuation of services. AMC amount for the five year after warranty period will be 
calculated to decide Lowest Vendor. 
 
UPS SYSTEM WITH BATTERIES SHOULD BE SUPPLIED AT FOLLOWING PLACES: 
 
S.NO 
LOCATION 
NEAR BY CITY 

Churu ( 3824) 
Churu 

Hanumanagarh Town ( 5438) 
Hanumanagarh Town 

SadulShahar ( 5437) 

Suratgarh ( 5574) 
Suratgarh 

Karanpur ( 4234) 
Churu 

Sikar Ind Area ( 5575) 
Sikar 

Sriganganagar Main ( 2142) 
Sriganganagar 

Laxamangarh ( 4238) 
Churu 

Ladnu (3562) 
Ladnu 

Pilibanga (5439) 
Pilibanga 

Bikaner Kriti Samtabh ( 5298) 
Bikaner 

Srimadhopur ( 5440) 
Srimadhopur 
 
 
1. 
Design, manufacture, testing at factory, supply, 
installation, commissioning and testing of state of the 
art 5 + 5 KVA capacity Single Phase input Single phase 
output Digital Signal Processing controlled, IGBT 
Rectifier Technology based online 
UPS system 
complying all technical specifications / features/ 
international standards as described in the tender 
document. With SNMPS interface facility. 
1 set (5+ 5 
KVA) 

Supply, Install, Commission & Testing 16 Nos SMF 100 Ah 
Batteries 
16 Nos of 
100 Ah 
3. 
Comprehensive annual maintenance charges for the 
above set consisting of entire 5+ 5 KVA UPS AFTER 
DEFECT LIABILITY PERIOD OF 2 YEARS. 
1ST YEAR 
2ND YEAR 
3RD YEAR 
4TH YEAR 
5th YEAR